UPLINK 

THE FORUM FOR COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING 

of 2 No 12 

January, 1992 

Access denied? 

Register reporters fight agency, obtain access rights to database 

Robert Jackson MICAR 

If you were to ask Orange County (Ca.) Regis ter reporter James Grimaldi for advice on how to no- gotiate with government agencies for databases on nine-track magnetic tape, he'd tell you one word patience. 

Grimaldi, and reporter Ron Campbell, had to display plenty of patience in obtaining a database from a state government agency that gave them a four-month-long runaround. 

Because the Register is currently using the data base in preparation for a series of computer-assisted ojects, Grimaldi and Campbell requested that the data 

See "Register" on P. 3 

News & Observer challenges N.C. for access to public information 

Van Denton Raleigh News & Observer 

Some North Carolina agencies are throwing up roadblocks to anyone seeking access to the billions of bytes of public information in the state government's vast computer network. 

In some cases, requests for public information are flatly denied. In others, agencies place restrictions on release of the information or ask extraordinary fees for it. 

North Carolina's public-records law specifically applies to public information stored in electronic data- bases, just as it does to printed information tucked away in file cabinets. 

See "Database" on p. 2 

But some top ranking state officials, wary of releas- 

Plugged In: 

Morning News tackles teen violence, HUD in computer-assisted reporting project debut 

Jon Schmid Micar 

Dead men tell no tales. Butre- porters at the Dallas Morning News know that death records can reveal patterns reflecting grave social ills. 

In fact the News' first com- puter assisted project showed that an "epidemic of violence" is stalk- ing Dallas' teenagers 

The process that led to this discovery began by sifting teen deaths out of the city-owned death ecords, which the News has on on nine-track magnetic tape. Then teen 

homicides were pulled from that table, explained Allan Pusey, as- sistant projects editor at the News. "Since there were no names, only dates and data, we worked backwards from police reports, developing a list of teen homi- cides from police reports," ex- plained Pusey. 

Using a computerized map- ping system, this data was plotted by neighborhood and the high- risk areas defined. 

Inside 

It was discovered that "a See "Dallas," on p. 4 

In St. Louis, Mo., crumbling neighbor- hoods in need of city government funding don't necessarily get the money they need to survive. The St. Louis Post-Dispatch uncovered this and more. For more de- tails turn to p. 2 

Suspicions arose last summer when the reporters found that some city wards had a much higher concentration of abandoned lots and buildings than oth- ers. 

Post-Dispatch reporters find HUD abuses in investigation 

Lisa Touye' MICAR 

In St. Louis, Mo., crumbling neighborhoods in need of city gov- ernment funding don't necessarily get the money they need to survive. 

That's what St. Louis Post Dispatch reporters Phil Linsalata, Tim Novak, and George Landau found in their investigation of city government's utilization of block grant money from the department of Housing and Urban Development. 

Suspicions arose last summer when the reporters found that some city wards had a much higher con- centration of abandoned lots and buildings than others. This led them to examine the city's use their annual $20 million in block grant money, which the city uses to help 

neighborhoods in trouble. 

"We didn't know why certain areas had high concentrations of abandoned lots and buildings while others had low ones," Linsalata said. "We suspected the city had under- taken an unspoken urban policy of triage - dividing neighborhoods into healthy areas, areas that were saveable but at risk, and terminal neighbor- hoods that were so distressed they were not worth putting money into." The reporters first step was to obtain the city's Grantee Performance Report - a report required by HUD. Th activity summary in the GPR to how much each program received but didn't tell what each program's See "HUD" on p. 5 

Database: from p. 1 

ing databases, say the law is inadequate to guard against misuse or inadvertent release of confidential electronic information. 

Here are where some battle lines have been drawn: 

*The state Department of Motor Vehicles has a database containing driving records for 6.5 million drivers. Want a copy? It will sell you a copy at $5 per record or $32.5 million for the whole database. 

*Since September, the Office of State Personnel has refused to provide the News & Observer a copy of a database containing public information on state employees such as names, positions and salaries. 

A legal opinion is currently being reviewed and a final decision will be made by Gov. James G. Martin. 

At the same time, James Lofton, secretary of the state Department of Administration reversed his stance in allowing the News & Observer access to the the depart- ment's database. 

This newsletter is a publication of the 



Missouri Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 120 Neff Hall University of Missouri Columbia, MO 65211 (314) 882-0684 

MICAR is interested in attaining any infor- mation, ideas or stories related to computer- assisted reporting for future issues of UPLINK If you wish to contribute, please mail your story or idea to the above address. Or, call us for a fax number. - Robert Jackson, Editor 

Page 2


Register: from p. 1 

base and its origin remain anonymous. That, however, doesn't make their story less interesting. According to Grimaldi the Register discovered the database in late July, and he formally requested the it from the agency on Aug. 1. 

Their troubles began immediately. 

"This is a very large agency and I was bounced back and forth from office to office and was finally told we couldn't thave the database," Grimaldi said. "Eventually I contacted the computer (technicians) and found that the agency had sold the information to another agency for $2,870." 

"We felt that (the information) was grossly overpriced," he added. 

Grimaldi and Campbell requested the database, but didn't hear from the agency for a month. When they were finally contacted, they were told that their request would be granted - for a mere $1,712.99. 

"The more I thought about it, the more it sounded as if (the agency) just picked a price right out of the air," Grimaldi said. 

Even more astounding was the reply they received when he asked about the basis for the high charge. "They informed us that the records were in the custody of the Stephen P. Teale Data Center and that the proposed charges were based on Teale's published billing rates," Grimaldi explained. 

The Teale Data Center is a public computer information agency that stores various California public agency databases by contract, according to Grimaldi. Although Teale is a public agency they can include overhead costs such as building maintenance, in pricing the duplication of databases. 

So Grimaldi and Campbell's next step was to contact Teale Director Chong W. Ha, and request the database. What they found was infuriating. According to Ha, the public agency- Teale-had custody of the database, and that their "representations were inaccurate." 

"Our patience came to an end when we learned that (the agency) had misinformed us about the location of (the database) and the basis for the prohibitive fee it proposed to charge," Grimaldi explained. "Since (Aug. 1) we talked to more than two dozen people and exhausted, several times over, the statutory 10-day limit for finding and duplicating the records." 

More importantly, Grimaldi said, was that there was no legal basis for the agency to charge the public what Teale would charge. In a letter to the agency requesting the database, Grimaldi and Campbell based their claim on the California Public Records Act. 

"Teale, as a self-supporting agency, claims considerable latitude in setting fees; it recovers every cost of its operation, no matter how tangential, from fees charged to other state agencies. Under the California Public Records Act, (the agency) does not enjoy such latitude," Grimaldi wrote. "The law is explicit: You may charge only the 'direct cost of duplication." 

"In out letter we attempted to convey that we were operating in the public interest and that access to the information concerning the conduct of the people's business is fundamentally important," Grimaldi added. 

Grimaldi and Campbell requested the database, but didn't hear from the agency for a month. When they were fi- nally contacted, they were told that their request would be granted for a mere $1,712.99. 

"Our patience came to an end when we learned that (the agency) had misin- formed us about the location of (the data- base) and the basis for the prohibitive fee it proposed to charge, Grimaldi explained. 

See "Access," on p. 6 

Page 3


"I think the real triumph of the series was the human suf- fering Bruce brought to the story, Pusey said of Tomaso's story on teen vio- lence. "I think the writing is extraordi- nary; powerful and empathetic without being maudlin. The computer could not and did not do that." 

"Suprise surprise, the biggest contribu- tions were going to those congressmen overseeing housing," said Pusey. 

Dallas: from p. 1 

handful of impoverished, crime-rid- den neighborhoods accounted for the majority of teen homicides in 1989 and 1990," according to the story by reporter Bruce Tomaso. 

"The result, I think, is a genu- ine balance of statistics versus hu- man experience," said Pusey. "The statistics told us a lot of surprising information we wouldn't have known without the computer. For instance, in a race-conscious city like Dallas, the virtual non-existence of cross- racial slayings came as a complete surprise." 

Still, Pusey has not lost touch with the human element essential to every good story and recognizes computers as part of a good reporter's toolbox. 

"I think the real triumph of the series was the human suffering Bruce brought to the story," Pusey said of Tomaso's story on teen vio- lence. "I think the writing is extraor- dinary; powerful and empathetic without being maudlin. The com- puter could not and did not do that." 

HUD scandal 

The News' latest computer- assisted project helped produce a six-part update on the HUD scan- dal. 

The series looked at the 24 developers with the biggest HUD rehabilitation contracts. However, that information was not conveniently located on one database, which just goes to show, "there's no way around the legwork," Pusey said. 

locations of their projects were iden tified from a database obtain through a government agency, which Pusey was "not at liberty to disclose." 

These developers and the 

Then reporters Craig Flournoy and Bobbi Miller contacted the local housing authorities where the projects were located. Through the contracts at the local housing authorities they figured out exactly how much money and tax credits the developers received. 

Pusey also created a data- base on the size of the apartments in the developments. It turns out a lot of the units were single dwellings, which does little to help the families the HUD projects were supposed to tar- get. 

A further database, using information from the Inspector Gen- eral of HUD, recorded which devel opers were audited, how much t were fined and how much they actu- ally paid. "It was dismally small," said Pusey of the amount remitted on the fines. 

And finally, Pusey cross-ref- erenced the list of top HUD develop- ers with FEC data available on nine- track tape. 

"Suprise surprise, the biggest contributions were going to those congressmen overseeing housing," said Pusey. 

With this information, Flournoy and Miller set out across country to see what all this meant for the tenants who had to live in those buildings. 

The investigation "found that these projects enriched a handful of politically connected private devel- opers while consigning thousand 

See "Project," on p. 6 

Page 4


HUD: from p. 2 

unction was, or how much was spent, Linsalata said. 

To answer those questions, according to Linsalata, reporters requested work program contracts under the Missouri Open Records Act. 

After three weeks of negotia- tion, the city agreed to release the GPR and all the work program con- tracts - on paper. Stacks of the report and programs were sent to a local printer who copied them for the 

Post Dispatch. 

"When we approached the city for the GPR and work program con- tracts, they intially wanted to charge for everything from copying fees to time needed to search for the rec- ords," Landau said. 

According to Landau, the GPR as not available on nine-track magnetic tape so Linsalata and Novak spent three weeks entering informa- tion from the paper reports into a database they created in FoxPro. 

Landau said that the city pre- pares the records and are required to provide copies for HUD. "HUD is not required to keep the records for more than a few years, he said." 

Later they used Atlas GIS to map where block grant funds were spent in each ward. The end result showed that city administrators' claims were misleading. 

"The city claimed that 45 per- cent of the block grant funding went to housing," Linsalata said. "When we looked at it most of the money was spent fixing broken gutters and giving residents paint to repaint their omes. In 1990, 17 percent of the funding was actually spent on devel- 

oping homes for sale or rent; build- ing new homes or renovating old ones. It blew away the city adminis- trators myths." 

"Neighborhoods are revived with substantial renovation and con- struction not quick fix-ups like new paint and gutters," Linsalata added. 

The reporters also found: 
That neighborhoods most in need of funding have received little block grant money for housing rede- velopment or renovation. 
Block grant money that was improperly used to supply car phones for an agency run by the mayor's niece, which coordinates city wide flower distribution, recycling pro- grams and city-wide cleanups. 
A corporation, run by a for- mer city official, received more than $80,000 in block grant money to teach homeowners to do minor re- pairs and train construction workers. The official hasn't held any home repair training classes in one year, and some construction worker train- ees have been in the program for eight years. 

City adminstrators countered that the Post Dispatch findings were seriously flawed because they exam- ined spending and not what was budgeted. Those adminstrators said that budgeting showed the city's intent to improve those neighborhoods. The reporters also discovered that renovated homes were sold in prosperous neighborhoods, while they were leased in the poorer St. Louis neighborhoods. "Why should poorer neigh- borhoods not have the benefits of 'for sale' housing?" Linsalata said. 

Block grant money that was im- properly used to sup- ply car phones for an agency run by the mayor's niece, which coordinates city wide flower distribution, recycling programs and city-wide clean- ups. 

"The city claimed that 45 percent of the block grant funding went to housing," Linsalata said. When we looked at it most of the money was spent fixing bro- ken gutters and giv- ing residents paint to repaint their homes." 

Page 5


After these initial successes Pusey said his "worst fear and greatest joy is coming true. Everyone is thinking of projects and there is actually a bottle neck." 

"I want to thank you for bringing the matter of my depart- ment's overcharges for the sale of (the database) file records to my attention," wrote (the head of the agency). "At the same time, please accept my apology for the improper fees quoted to you." 

Project: from p. 4 

families to inadequate and overpriced apartments," reported Flournoy and Miller. 

The two reporters investigated 95 projects completed by the top 24 "mod rehab" developers. More than 250 tenants were interviewed. 

Another project done by the News' involved a computerization of the civil rights data kept by every school in Dallas and helped writer Jonathan Eig produce two stories. 

"We utilized the reporting from each individual school to produce a database that encompassed all the Dallas-area school systems," Pusey explained. 

Computer examination of this data revealed that black students in the Dallas suburbs are assigned to special education far more frequently than their white classmates. 

Using the same database, a second story was produced which illustrated a "wrinkle in the paddling pattern" for Dallas schools. In other words, minority students were more 

likely to receive corporal punishmen than white students. 

"Again, I think the project would have been all but impossible without the computerization of the data," said Pusey. 

After these initial successes Pusey said his "worst fear and great- est joy is coming true. Everyone is thinking of projects and there is actu- ally a bottle neck." 

Pusey is putting together a proj- ect to join several different databases that, when combined, will provide reporters with a quick profile on a neighborhood. 

Using this system, reporters will be able to plot the address they're interested in on a computerized grid mapping system. This, in turn, will correspond to census tracks. 

With all these databases loader onto the News' mainframe, informa- tion like crime statistics, birth and death records and census data for a particular area will be available in one package. 

Access: from p. 3 

The head of the agency agreed, and on Nov. 12, Grimaldi and Campbell received more than they could of hoped for - an $81.18 charge for the database, and an apology. 

"I want to thank you for bringing the matter of my department's overcharges for the sale of (the database) file records to my attention," wrote (the head of the agency). "At the same time, please accept my apology for the improper fees quoted to you." 

Grimaldi said that because of the questions raised by the Register, (the agency) is reevaluating the methods used for calculating associated costs. They are also revising the fee structure so that it "accurately reflects actual direct costs incurred to produce either hard copy or computer tape re- production of the files." 

"We realized that we were the first news organization to ever request (the database)," Grimaldi said. "It was a situation that the agency had se. precedent in pricing the cost of duplicating the database." 

Page 6
