O January 1995 A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

Uplink update 

We start the new year with articles that show the ways in which computer-assisted report- be used on different beats and subjects. 

Mike Wendland, a TV re- porter, recounts the intense and widespread interest that stories on poorly-maintained restaurants can create. (After all, everyone eats.) Seth Hamblin interviews some of the better environmental reporters on how to use elec- tronic information. David Armstrong, a long-time Boston reporter, talks about the treasure trove of stories that a parking ticket databases offers. 

In addition, George Landau, a guru of cleaning dirty data, volunteers yet another clever way of standardizing the bothersome ways in which names appear in databases. 

In nextmonth's issue, we plan to offer more variety by doing an overview of some of the best CAR stories that we saw in 1994. 

Inside e 

Repaying tickets in Boston Pages 2-3 Successes with EPA data- bases 

Pages 4-5 Tech tips Pages 6-7 Database Library keeps growing Page 7 

Bits, Bytes and Barks 

0 

Detroit inspection data provides bite 

Page 8


Restaurants on CAR menu 

By Mike Wendland WDIV-TV, Detroit 

Viewer response and e-mail are still coming in, weeks after our CAR (com- puter-assisted reporting) project on metropolitan Detroit's dirtiest restau- rants hit the air last fall. From start to finish, the project took about two months, with all but a week or so taken up by data acquisition and analysis. Fleshing out the people part of the stories - finding the food poison- ing victims and confronting the restau- rant owners - was the easy part. Restaurant inspections are handled by county health departments. In our case, we had three separate counties regulating restaurant sanitation and two municipalities operating their own health departments. That meant we had five agencies to deal with, none of which kept the data we needed in electronic form. What made the project feasible for us, however, was the standard inspec- tion form each health department sani- tarian filled out during the inspection. The form called for a rating to be given to each establishment The rating was determined by subtracting stan- dardized points for each violation from a perfect score of 100. Anything less than 70 was considered unsanitary. So we knew we had a measuring stick - something that could compare a restaurant in one jurisdiction to a restaurant in another. The problem was that there were too many" "others." More than 10,000 restaurants are in business in metropolitan Detroit. We wanted to find the worst. 

Our approach was to review the mostrecent inspection reports for each restaurant. We designed: our own Foxl Pro table and took laptops into the offices to enter the data on each eating place that scored 70 or below. While gathering the raw data we went online and sent a query out on Profnet look- ing for experts in the field of restau- rant sanitation. From that research, we learned that a single low score can sometimes be attributed to the inspec- tor simply arriving at the wrong time on the wrong day. The only way to be fair, the experts said, was to look for patterns - con- sistently low scores over a period of time. We decided to revise the table and include the last three inspections, which covered an 18-month period. Back at the office, we later aver- aged and sorted our list of" dirty" res- taurants. From just over 10,000 res- taurants, our list of problem, or un- sanitary establishments totaled 224. There were plenty of surprises. Top gourmet restaurants, trendy yuppie eateries in the suburbs and a popular downtown Cajun restaurant all made the list of dirty restaurants. So did 

Continued on page two 

Coming Events
 March 12-17, 1995
 NICAR Seminar
 Columbia, Missouri

May 14-19, 1995
 NICAR Seminar
 Columbia, Missouri


Uplink January 1995 Volume 7, Number 1 A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

Lessons from parking database never expire Repaying tickets in Boston 

Editor Brant Houston jourjbh muccmail missouri.edu Managing Editor Matt Reavy c598895@mizzoul missouri.edu Design Editor Jan Colbert Senior Contributing Editors Richard Mullins jourram@muccmailmissou Jennifer LaFleur jourjal@mucemail missouri.edu Contributing Editors Rosemary Armao Tracy Barnett Staff Drew Sullivan, Wallace Winfrey, Padraie Cassidy, John Anglin and Gwen Carleton Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer- Assisted Reporting, P.O. Box 838 Columbia, MO 65205. (314) 882-0684. Subscription price is $30 (U.S.) annually, $40 outside the United States. Postmaster: Please send address changes to NICAR. 

NICAR is a joint effort of Investigative Reporters and Editors and the University of Missouri School of Journalism with the mission of bringing the journalism industry into the 21st Century. NICAR services include hands-on newsroom training seminars in computer-assisted reporting. special academic and advanced training at Missouri, data analysis and advice. NICAR is supported by a grant from The Freedom Forum intended to help the institute deliver its services nationwide to news organizations and associations. 

By David Armstrong The Boston Globe 

Parking in Boston is often compared to a trip to the dentist: It can be painful and expensive. The city of Boston, not unlike scores of other cities across the country, dispatches meter maids to aggressively prowl the clogged city streets and hand out thousands of parking tickets each day. 

Since everybody hates parking tickets, the Boston Herald (where I used to work) decided a year ago to request a copy of the city's parking ticket database. We had a number of stories in mind when requesting the database. We wanted to know what areas of the city were ticketed most frequently, which areas were avoided by ticket writers and why, who were the scofflaws and who was having their tickets dismissed or taken care of. 

The database of 3.5 million records on 269- track tapes proved helpful for those ideas and more. 

In fact, the most surprising information on the database was something we had never con- sidered. The city had collected more than $2 

million in overpayments from unwitting parking violators. This information proved to be wildly popular with the motoring public. The newspaper published a list of those companies and individuals owed the most money by the city because of overpayments. The over- payments were the result of errors by the city in recording license plate numbers, overlapping overdue notices and poor bookkeeping by park- ing violators who paid for the same ticket twice. Embarrassed parking officials were forced to admit they knew about the overpayments for years, but did nothing to return the money. The same officials set up a hotline to refund the money after the story appeared. The mayor ordered that printouts of the 60,000 companies and individuals owed money for overpayments be placed in every library for public inspection. Twomonthsafterthe first story was published, the city had returned $1 million to parking violators. The database provided by the city of Boston actually came from a city vendor - Lockheed Information Services. Lockheed maintains the same records for many large and midsize cities 

Restaurants: Continued from page one 

plenty of Coney islands, Chinese restau- rants and some of the well-known chains. 

As we entered the data at the health department, we created a memo field in the FoxPro table, using it to record food-borne illness reports, customer complaints and no- table problems like cockroaches floating in water glasses, bugs in food, sewerage backed up on the kitchen floor and other disgusting things you'l be glad we didn't mention if you're reading this at lunch time. That led us to the people stories that fleshed out the statistics. 

Our I-team series aired on the 11 p.m. news. We won the time period all four nights. The series was the talk of the town for weeks on the morning drive-time radio shows and the newspaper on-the-town columns. 

We invited viewers to write in for a list. We received some 8,000 letters. We also made the lists available by e-mail and elec- 

tronically sent out another 1,000. And then there was this postscript: The Detroit area restaurant with the absolutely lowest score - a 40 - was owned by the suburban chef who we did a weekly "gour- met-on-the go" report on our noon news. I ended up interviewing him about his prob- lems after he stepped off the set. "Go" he did. He is no longer working for the station. Note: For additional information on COV- ering restaurants and health department data see "Dining on eatery data" by Dan Browning in the March 1994 issue of Up- link. 

Mike Wendland is the head of the I-Team for WDIV-TV in Detroit. He attended the August 994 NICAR "boot camp" for com- puter-assisted reporting. He can be reached by e-mail at mikew@wdiv.com. 

2


across the country. 

The database has fields indicating the loca- tion of the ticket, who wrote it, the amount, the amount of overdue charges, whether or not the ticket was dismissed, the registration number of the ticketed vehicle and more. 

A Lesson on obtaining data 

The size of the file - 1.7 gigabytes - pre- sented some problems. The data was analyzed on a Gateway 486 PC with an 800 megabyte harddrive. Using Nine-track Express, Iheavily futered the data to bring in only the informa- tion I absolutely needed. 

Using FoxPro, I would look at 300 to 400 megabyte chunks. For instance, when looking at who had tickets dismissed, I brought in only the fields for dismissal, name, amount, location and date. This cut the record length more than 70 percent. The hardest part of this endeavor, it turned out, was getting the tapes in the first place (see sidebar). 

Spending three weeks analyzing and play- ing with the data also drove home another point: Reporters should always do their own computer work, even if it is with the assistance of a more experienced or skilled programmer. Several story ideas were born from the long and often painful task of learning the database and attempting to analyze it. 

- Widely hated meter maids, who endure the curses and shouts of angry ticket recipi- ents, are major money makers for the city. We found one meter maid had written 15,210 tickets totalling $516,000 in just one year of work. The same meter maid was paid $433 a week for her work. 

- We were able to produce a chart show- ing readers the 40 locations in Boston that would most likely result in your car getting a ticket. 

- Rental car companies were the biggest scofflaws in the city. Two companies owed the city a combined $1 million for parking tickets amassed by rental drivers who never paid up. 

It took three years for the Boston Herald to obtain a copy of the city's parking ticket database on 9-track tapes. 

(David Armstrong moved from The Herald to The Globe in 1994. He can be reached at 617- 929-2539 or through e-mail at armstr@news. globe. com.) 

The city only complied with the request when it was threatened with legal action by the state attorney general, who is charged with enforcing the state's public records law. 

In repeatedly rejecting the Herald's request, the city maintained it had the right to decide the form of any response to a public records request. In that vein, the city offered to provide the parking records in paper form at great cost to the newspaper. The state's public records law, which is modeled after the federal FOIA, does not provide government agencies the option of responding this way. 

Until recently, the city of Boston uniformly refused to comply with any requests for records in electronic form. In most of these cases, the city would offer a mile-long printout of paper as an alternative. In fact, city workers once delivered boxes of documents to the Herald newsroom after a reporter specifically requested the information on 9-track tape. 

In addition to the discovery that tens of thousands of motorists were overpaying the city for tickets, here are some of the other stories that resulted from analyzing the data- base: 

It should be noted that the city's top computer manager also served as the mayor's pollster. That combination of computer knowledge and political savvy may explain the city's reluctance to help the media and others gain access to computerized records. - David Armstrong 

Parking tickets offer wealth of stories 

Meanwhile, police officers and local business owners contributed anecdotes and color with their tales of furious motorists and creative scofflaws. 

Whether you're a CAR novice or an old pro, city parking ticket records offer a wealth of story opportunities. 

Ron Brown of the Roanoke Times & World-News investigated his city's "Car Wars" in a series published earlier this year. (Call the IRE/ NICAR resource center, 314-882-2042 for a copy.) With the help of computerized municipal records, Brown found how much Roanoke is earning from parking tickets, how many it dismisses, and the top 10 blocks for parking violations. Other statistics included the top grossing police officers and a list of the most common types of violations. 

But even better, Brown also found a few surprises on his-list of frequent offenders. 

- The police officer assigned to drive former Mayor Raymond Flynn had every parking ticket issued to his personal car, a 1987 Jag- uar, dismissed. The tickets totalled $355. 

At the top of the list was Roanoke's Chief Assistant Common- wealth Attorney Betty Jo Anthony - someone, Brown wrote, who makes a living enforcing the rules. 

And before she could be identified, Times & World-News columnist Kathleen Wilson stepped forward with her own admission of excessive fines. 

Gwen Carleton Nicar staff 

ing dly ose ney yin ing uk- ice. ced for The the the ney ary first 1$1 ston eed th ities 

3


W 70335


Environment & CAR 

Successes with EPA databases 

By Seth Hamblin NICAR Staff 

With government data available on every- thing from endangered birds to the quality of the air through which they fly, there's no limit to the enterprise stories an environmental re- porter can craft. Some reporters say that be- cause of the amount, variety and accessibility of these databases, the environment is better suited 

EPA sources 

Federal EPA databases can provide environmental re- porters with countless enterprise stories. However, report- ers who have used these databases say state and local databases often are easier to get and have more recent data than their federal counterparts. 

Here are some of the EPA databases environmental reporters have found useful. They can be acquired with a Freedom of Information Act request. if the cost is too high, call NICAR, 314-882-0684, and we might be able to offer it at a lesser price. 

Emergency Response Notification System 

ERNS contains notifications of oil and hazardous chemical spills. Fields in the database include name of discharger, date of release; material released; cause of release; amount released; source of release; damages, injuries or deaths; and incident location. Sponsoring department: Emergency Response Division Contact Dana Stalcup Telephone: (703) 603-8735 Information line: (202) 260-2342 

Permit Compliance System 

PCS contains information on more than 65,000 industrial facilities that hold National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permits, which allow the facilities to discharge wastewater. Fields include facility name, permit limit, viola- tion and enforcement actions. Sponsoring deparment: Office of Water Contact: Mike Mundell Telephone: (202) 564-5031 Information line: (703) 908-2680 

Aerometric Information Retrieval System 

AIRS contains records on emissions and compliance data for industrial plants as well as ambient air quality data for geographical areas. Sponsoring department: Office of Air and Radiation Contact: Andrea Kelsey Telephone: (919) 541-5549 

"Access EPA," the source of this list, can be found at the gopher site: gopher.epa.gov. "EPA Information Locators," "Access EPA." 

for computer-as- sisted reporting than any other beat. Their consistent success in using environmental databases shows they're probably right. 

Toxic waste spills 

Dave Davisasked to cover the environ- ment when he joined the Plain Dealer in 1990 because he knew the beat would give him plenty of chances to do CAR stories. One of his first CAR stories for the Plain Dealer, "Spills Chill Regula- tors," took about two weeks. Using XDB database manager software, Davis ana- lyzed the 1991 Ohio emergency response database, which comprises 5,589 records on chemical spills. (NICAR has the U.S. emergency response database, ERNS, in its library.) 

combines numerical fields with variable-length text fields. This mix helped Davis to flesh out statistics with colorful narratives. 

"This was a per- fect database for us because Ohio has a lot of chemical emer- gencies. A lot of plants blow up," Davis said. 

For instance, one record explained how a railroad switchman lost communication with an engineer when batteries failed in their two- way radios justas the train was switching tracks. The engineer backed the car into a storage tank, which spilled 800 gallons of a toxic chemical. The chemical ended up being flushed into the city's sewers. 

Davis discovered that 121 of the chemical spills in Ohio been severe enough to threaten lives and property. Rarely did the companies report the spills to the Ohio Environmental Protection Agency, as is required by law. In- stead, mostly police or fire officials called in the accidents. Sometimesresidents blew the whistle. 

The database 

Endangered species 

Fresno (Calif.) Bee reporter Russell Clemings recommended that when reporters "cast their net" for environmental stories, they should cast it wide enough to include computer data. When Clemings was researching "Struggle to Sur- vive," a series on endangered species in Califor- nia, he heard the 1987 amendment to the En- dangered Species Act required the federal Fish and Wildlife Service to compile a list of how much money was being spent to preserve each endangered species. He asked for a copy of the report. 

"I realized that what I was looking at was a computer printout," Clemings said. "So Iasked, 'Can you send me the disk, too?" 

Using a 286 computer and a DOS version of Paradox, Clemings grouped federal and state spending on each class of endangered species. He found that most funding went to birds or mammals that are attractive and well-known, such as bald eagles and gray wolves. Preserva- tion efforts discriminated against bugs, crusta- ceans and snails. Officials were particularly short-shrifting plants. They spent an average of 66 times more per species on birds than plants - an average of $604,260 and $9,050, respec- tively. Spiders had it the worst of all. Officials spent an average of $500 per endangered spider species. 

Clemings said this data base could be adapted for any state or region. Reporters could find out from their states' wildlife departments which 

4


species on the list inhabit their areas. The re- porters then could focus on the species within the reporters' states or regions. 

this one, Adam Berliant, a database editor for the Tacoma (Wash.) News Tribune, set up the Toxic Release Inventory on a computer in the newsroom. Any reporter can type in the name of a company and come up with the kinds of chemicals it releases and the manufacturing process in which it is involved: Unfortunately most reporters at the News Tribune fail to see its potential, and the database setup, while easy to operate, is rarely used, Berliant said. Thurm suggested looking for state data- bases rather than federal ones whenever pos- sible. TRI and ERNS, for instance, are first compiled by states and then sent to the U.S. EPA. Therefore, state databases are usually more up-to-date than their federal counter- parts. Another good reason to look on the state level, Clemings said, is that there are lots of obscure but useful state environmental data- bases waiting for reporters to discover them. His rule of thumb: If you get a document that looks like a computer table, ask for it on disk. 

Water pollution 

Before joining the Plain Dealer, Davis was a reporter at the Dayton (Ohio) Daily News, whose readers live near the banks of the Great Miami River and its tributaries. Davis ac- quired a U.S. EPA database on water pollution discharge permits to find out how much sludge was being pumped into the waterways. 

Not only was it a whole lot of sludge, it was a whole lot more sludge than the factories could legally dump under their National Pollution Discharge Elimination System permits. 

The records, compiled in the Permit Compli- ance System database, showed that state envi- ronmental regulators knew of the facilities' chronic violations but did little to to punish the businesses. Some of the violators were dump- ing up to several thousand times the amounts that their permits allowed. Many companies racked up hundreds of violations without pen- alty. 

To see if the computer data were reflected in the quality of the river's water, Davis canoed 110 miles of the Great Ohio. What he saw and smelled confirmed what the numbers were tell- ing him. 

How to deal with EPA data 

With just an old XT, shareware and a free database, you can create great environmental stories for your readership area. The EPA now gives out state Toxic Release Inventory databases as if they were candy. To get a state's TRI database mailed to you, call TRI user support at (202) 260-1531. You will receive it within a couple of weeks. The data comes on 1/2-inch disks, so if you don't have this type of drive, swap the data onto 3 1/2-inch disks on another computer. Data jockeys at the EPA set up state TRI for easy import into almost any database program. If you don't already have a database program, you can to get a shareware database, such as PC-File, from a computer-users group, BBS or university computing service. Once the data is imported, separate the records by zip code and add the amount of chemicals released by all the companies within each zip code. This will show you which areas in your county or region have reported the most industrial pollution. You can then look at the companies which fall within the zip code areas with the highest amount of pollution to see which companies are emitting the most and worst pollutants. Present this information in a atamap or create a list ranking the polluted areas and the biggest polluters works. By calculating totals for the releases to air, water, on-site landfill, underground well injection and off-site hauling fields, you can show, in percentages, how industries in your area are disposing their waste. Each facility will have a field for its standard industrial code, which tells what sort of manufacturing they do, from making clothes to smelting metals. By totaling the amount of releases for each standard industrial code, you can rank the types of industries that pollute the most. Your reporting doesn't end with the data analysis. With the address of each facility included in the database, it easy to find the residents nearest the factories. The companies also file the name and telephone number of a contact person with whom you can confirm the data and ask whether attempts at pollution reduction are being made. (Some of the concepts for this sidebar were derived from Dave Davis' story "Industries Report Decreases," The Plain Dealer, December 11, 1991.) 

rith 

NO- 

ks. 

Scott Thurm, a reporter for the San Jose (Calif.) MercuryNews, says environmental data- bases can be as handy for dailies as they are for enterprise stories. During the early morning on July 25, 1993, General Chemical Corp. in nearby Richmond, Calif., developed a leak in a tank containing sulfur dioxide. More than 2,000 people sought treatment at hospitals for sting- ing eyes and sore throats. 

out 

nk, 

"We were going by one factory, and this shocking pink water was coming out of the pipes, turning the river pink," he said. The wastewater from the factory near Hamilton, Ohio, altered the color of the river for a mile. Further downriver near Franklin, Ohio, a mix ofblack incinerator ash and detergent ran down a trough into the water to turn it into a sickly green. 

gth 

a 

or 

va- 

To prepare for chemical accidents such as 

Databases in dailies 

cal. the 

Thurm called the California EPA to get data on the types of toxics General Chemical pro- duced. By 11 a.m., Thurm had the entire Toxic Release Inventory profile of the company to provide background for the story. 

5


ten nies ntal 

ical 

the 

In- 

tle. 

ngs heir cast hen jur- for- En- ish LOW ach the 

as a 

red, 

tate 

wn, 

ted out ich 

n of 

ies. 

sta- arly of unts - ials ider 

Tech Tips 

Editing data for consistency 

By George Landau St. Louis Post-Dispatch 

Here's how: 

Without any fancy programming - with only two keyboard macros, really you can get the job done with a minimum of pain. 

A lot of data analysis involves grouping and sorting-summing the expense reimbursements to a bunch of employees when you have the employees' names and addresses but not Social Security numbers, for example. Unless you're sure that Joseph Schmo's name is entered the same way for each reimbursement, and that his address is consistently spelled, you won't be able to get reliable totals. 

One dependable but very painful way to edit this stuff is to list the various values in a field - names, for example - endmanually do search-and-replace on the database until everything's consistent. In FoxPro or another SQL database, you could start like this: select fullname, count(*) from expenses group by 1; order by 1 The query would return an alphabetized list of every way that a name is spelled in the entire database, along with the number of times each variation occurs. For example: 

CNT 

Landau, George 

Landau, George T 

Landau, George T. 

Landau, George Thomas 

1. For reasons that will become clear as you read on, we need to get a list of every unique name into a Fox Pro program file (°.prg), which is just a text file that contains a list of commands that will be executed in bulk, as if you had typed them all at once in FoxPro's command box. A query like this will do the job: 

select fullname from expenses group by 1; order by 1 [this line isn't actually neces- sary, since the group by' sorts alpha-ascending by default] 

to file CLEAN1.PRG nowait 

The last line of this query puts the results into the specified text file, as ordinary ASCII text. The 'nowait' clause prevents the process from halting at every screenful and forcing you to press a key to continue. 

FULLNAME 

2. Now let's edit the "program" you just created by typing in the Command box: modify command clean1 

7 

3 

3. Delete the first few lines, down to and including the line that contains the field name heading. You' also notice that each line starts with two spaces of padding, and ends with a lot of padding. We want to get rid of those extra spaces, which we can do by using the Find function off the Edit menu. 

2 

2 

Let's say you're certain these are all the 

same George Landau (remember, we can check 

addresses, also). You want to standardize on 

the variation with the most info: "George Tho- 

mas Landau." To edit these the hard way, you 

could start typing commands like this: 

First, get rid of all the leading spaces by searching for VIn (these blanks represent two spaces) and replacing with Ir\n (\r\n is how you specify Carriage Return-Line Feed in FoxPro's Find dialog box). Then get rid of the trailing spaces by replacing Vln with VIn a few times; each time you get no matches, specify fewer trailing spaces until all are gone. 

replace all fullname with "Landau, George 

Thomas" for fullname = "Landau, George" 

replace all fullname with "Landau, George 

Thomas" for fullname = "Landau, George T" 

This search-and-replace step can be tricky, so don't panic if you don't get it right the first time. Call me if you get stuck. 

replace all fullname with "Landau, George 

Thomas" for fullname = "Landau, George T." 

Fine, but there are 10,000 records in this 

database. You might not be done for another 

month. The absolute fastest way out of this 

4. Now we've got a list of every name varia- tion in the database, free of unwanted spaces. Our goal is to record two keyboard macros that will generate a REPLACE command for the names we want to change. Let's say you're looking at these entries again: 

mess involves some moderately complex 

FoxPro programming; if you really want to 

know, give me a call and I'll tell you how to do 

it. But without any fancy programming - 

with only two keyboard macros, really - you 

Landau, George Landau, George T Landau, George T. Landau, George Thomas If you wanted to make the last one (Landau, 

can get the job done with a minimum of pain. 

6


1 

George Thomas) the standard entry, click the cursor anywhere on that line. Here's where we'll record our first macro. First press shift- F10 to start the macro recorder. Specify a keystroke to assign the macro (I like Ctrl-Z, 'cause I don't use it for anything else). Then click OK. Every key you press from now until you press shift-F10 again will be recorded - mouse movements and clicks will be ignored. Press these keys (things in curly braces repre- sent special keys; don't actually type the braces or the word, just press the key or key-combo): [Home] {Shift+End} {Ctrl+C} 

the key for the second macro) to create a "re- place" command. Do this until you' made it all the way through the file. Then go through and delete any entries that weren't made into a "replace command (Hint: if you' re comfort- able going back and forth between text files and tables, as I described in the earlier part of this handout dealing with print images, you can append this program into a table and delete all the records that don't start with "replace", then copy it back to a text file). 7. Before you go any further, make a backup copy of the table you're intending to edit. 8. Then open up either the backup or the original and do the program you just created. If you called the file "cleanl.prg," you just need to type "do clean1" in the Command box. This program may take a while to run if the database islarge, because each "replace" command forces FoxPro to scan through all of the data. tleast you're free to do something else, though. 9. When it's done, your data will be stan- dardized. You can now do accurate grouping, summing and sorting. 

Now click shift-F10 again and click OK to stop recording the macro. Now whenever you press Ctrl-Z (or whatever keystroke you speci- fied for the macro), FoxPro will define what- ever line the cursor's on and copy all of it to the clipboard. 

t 

y 

a 

S 

Now click the cursor on the first line you want to change, "Landau, George." Here's where we'll record our second macro. First press shift-F10 to start the macro recorder. Specify a keystroke to assign the macro (try something physically close to Ctrl-Z or what- ever you chose, like Ctrl-A). Then click OK Once again, every key you press from now until you press shift-F10 again will be recorded - mouse movements and clicks will be ignored. Type these keys and characters (again, things in curly braces are special keys; don't actually type the braces or the word, just press the key or key-combo): 

t 

a 

1 

@ 

1 

t 

t 

e 

10 

Database library keeps growing 

NICAR keeps adding to its database library. A partial list includes: 

Federal Aviation Administration service difficulty reports that show the history of problems that a plane had before it crashed. 
FBI crime data that allows you to do detailed analysis of crime in your community and state. 
Social security death records that you can use for stories that go beyond simple listing. The database also permits reporters to circumvent states that have closed their death records. 
Federal procurement contracts. This database can help you discover the impact of cuts in defense spending, or the amount of housing and office space federal agencies rent in your city, or the amount of toilet paper the feds purchased in your community, or the biggest federal contractors in your state. 
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act records that you use to look at disparities in minority lending. 
OSHA inspection safety records that show the most fre- quently cited employer in your state and what the work safety violations have been. 
Federal gun dealer records that show who is dealing in weapons or that a local police officer moonlights as a provider of guns to criminals. 

{Home}replace all fullname with "{Ctrl+V}" for fullname = "{End}" 

Then press Shift-F10 again and click OK to stop recording the macro. Now whenever you press Ctrl-A (or whatever keystroke you speci- fied for the second macro), FoxPro will create a command to replace that line's contents with whatever's in the clipboard. 

5. Before you get down to business, you should save the macros so that you won't have to re-record them next time you run FoxPro. Pull down the Program menu and choose Mac- ros. You can either save these as part of the default macros, which are loaded whenever FoxPro is run, or under a new name that you can restore manually when you need to. 

3 1 

1 

S I 

To request data, call NICAR at 314-882-0684 or E-Mail us at nicar@muccmail.missouri.edu 

6. Now for the truly thrilling part. To begin standardizing all those spellings, just position the cursor on an entry that you want to become the standard and click Ctrl-Z (the first macro you recorded). This copies the line to the clip- board. Then click on one of the lines you want changed to the standard, and click Ctrl-A (or 

1 

S 

7


Bits, Bytes and Barks 

Online environmental info in Canada 

Environment Canada's Green Lane (http:// www.ns.doe.ca/how.html) provides a wide variety of regional and national environmental information, in- cluding: 
- the latest regional weather forecasts, satellite pho- tos, maps & radar images 
- the complete texts of many of its most popular national publications; 
- details about many regional and national initiatives and programs; 
- answers to some of the questions that Atlantic Canadians most frequently ask when they phone or write to the Department; 
- direct phone numbers of the Department's regional experts on numerous issues and initiatives; 
- details and documents regarding regional public con sultation meetings; 
- news about regional public environmental events; 
- descriptions of the department's funding programs, including a guide on how to prepare funding proposals; 
- alist of the department's key publications available to order; 
- copies of its recent regional press releases and an- nouncements; 
- the complete text of its environmental legislation, regulations, guidelines, codes of good practice, and related policies; 
- details about its key regional federal/provincial agree- ments; and 
- descriptions of its mission, roles, responsibilities and organizational structure. 

Overview of 1994 CAR stories 

Uplink will do an overview of 1994's CAR stories in the February issue, but here's a sample of articles we've re- cently received: 

- Athree-part series on suicide by (Tacoma, WA) News Tribune, using Washington state death records. 
- A three-part series on elevator safety in Massachu- setts by The Boston Globe, using elevator inspection records. 
- An investigation by New York Newsday into parking tickets that found the city owed $18 million to more than 600,000 motorists, using a parking ticket database. (See parking ticket story on page two.) 
- An eight-part series on crime and punishment by The 

MiamiHerald, using FBI Uniform Crime Report data, crimi- nal justice databases, and 87 reports from the U.S. Bureau of Justice Statistics. 
- A four-part series, "Starving the Wife," by The Cbar lotte Observer on how divorcing spouses take advantage of flawed state laws and poorly monitored courts. The Ob- server used court records to document long delays in cases. 
- An investigation by the The Plain Dealer in Cleveland, OH, into thousands of unnecessary C-sections, using Ohio birth records. 

Copies of these articles can be obtained through NICAR by calling 314-882-2042. 

Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

100 Neff Hall

University of Missouri
 School of Journalism
 Columbia, MO 65211


NON-PROFIT ORG.
 U. S. POSTAGE
 P A I D
 PERMIT NO. 309
 COLUMBIA, MO 65211
