O

February 1998

A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting


INSPECTION Du JOUR 

Restaurants Revealed 

By Joel Grover KCBS-TV 

When I first proposed the idea of a series on restaurant conditions, it seemed like such a basic investigation. I knew similar investi- gations had been done for years in other cities. I would have never thought a series like this would attract a firestorm of attention, would be the subject of dozens of newspaper articles, and result in major changes in the law. But that's just what happened when KCBS-TV aired "Behind the Kitchen Door" last November. 

(For related stories, see Stuart Watson's restaurant inspection reprise on page two and 

FREE BOAT TO CHINA All Expenses Paid 

By Kara G. Morrison NICAR 

After Congress tightened rules on mem- ber travel funded by private groups in late 1995, Gannett News Service decided to check if the new rules had made a differ- ence. 

"We wanted to assess how much travel members of Congress and their staffs have taken from private groups with a stake in Capitol Hill legislation," said GNS spe- cial projects editor David Milliron. 

The result was a GNS special report titled "Congress: Have invitation, will travel." 

Thespecial report, which ran predomi- nantly in many of Gannett's 91 daily newspapers in November, included an overall computer analysis and story on congressional travel, along with stories detailing which special interests paid the highest travel tabs, which destinations were most common, which committees 

a review of a Cox News Service project on food processing plants on page three.) 

The story began with a tip: a former L.A. County health inspector told me the county was doing nothing to force filthy restaurants to clean up. A quick computer search showed me that no other local media had ever inves- tigated L.A. County's restaurant inspection program, so it seemed like a good subject to probe. 

I began my research with what seemed like a simple request to the L.A. County Health Department for its computer data- base of restaurant inspections. At first the county said such a database didn't exist and later said certain restaurant data wasn't pub- lic. Fortunately, my station was willing to fight for this data. CBS lawyers battled L.A. County back and forth for 8 months. Only when we told them we were taking them to court did the health department hand over its database. 

Hired help 

KCBS hired NICAR to crunch the data. Clearly we could not have done this our- selves. L.A. County's database contained hundreds of thousands of records on 20,000 restaurants. The county tried to send us the data in a form that would have made it virtually unusable. One phone call from NICAR to the health department solved the problem. 

Unsettling scores 

Our producer, Adam Symson, and I brainstormed with Andy Lehren and Jack Dolan at NICAR about all the ways we could crunch the data. We used Foxpro 2.6. We wanted to know how often restaurants were inspected. We wanted to see what percentage of restaurants were averaging poor to failing 

CHECK, PLEASE Update 

Check, please. This food is not so glorious. On this month's menu, Uplink serves up 3 CAR projects exposing deficient food inspections. 

Joel Grover recounts a KCBS series on L.A. restau- rant inspections, and Stuart Watson details: WRALseries on North Carolina's mislead- ing ratings system. As a third course, a summary of a Cox News Service look into sparse USDA punishments of pro- cessing plants is also available. And Nora Paul tops it off with a survey of relevant links. 

A review of a Gannett News Service analysis of pri- vately sponsored congres- sional travel and Neil Reisner's advice on doing short-term CAR projects on breaking news are also in- side. 

Continued on page four 

Plus, there's the goings- on at a recent NICAR ad- vanced seminar and a work- shop on health care. 

PAGE 10 First Ventures PAGE H On The Internet PAGE 12 

Continued on page five 

Stats from the road PAGE 13 Tech Tip PAGE 16 IRE/NICAR Notes 

Uplink 

February 1998 Volume 10, Number 1 A newsletter for the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

EDITOR 

Brant Houston brant@nicar.org 

INSPECTION Du JOUR 

MANAGING EDITOR 

Brent Johnson bjohnson@nicar.org 

SENIOR CONTRIBUTING 

Sarah Cohen sarah@nicar.org Richard Mullins richard@nicar.org 

COPY EDITOR Jeanine M. Davis 

ART DIRECTOR Wendy Charron STAFF Jack Dolan Seth Hemmelgarn Justin Mayo Margaret Murphey Curt Poff Debbie Roberts John Sullivan Alistair White Paul Walmsley Ted Peterson 

Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting, 138 Neff Hall Annex Columbia, MO 65211. (573) 882-0684. Subscriptions are $40 for IRE members, $60 for nonmembers. Postmaster: Please send address changes to NICAR Send e-mail to jeanine@nicar.org NICAR is a joint effort of Investigative Reporters and Editors and the University of Missouri School of Journalism. NICAR services include hands-on newsroom training on computer- assisted reporting, special academic and advanced training in data analysis. NICAR is supported by grants from The Freedom Forum and other foundations intended to help the institute deliver its services nationwide to news organizations and associations. 

Behind the Ratings 

By Stuart Watson WRAL-TV 

EDITORS 

Most of us eat out hundreds of times a year - sometimes more often than we eat at home. While some CAR veterans look down their noses at reports on restaurant health inspec- tions as elementary or overdone, few topics strike closer to home with the public. Many newspapers have long posted weekly sanitation inspections as part and parcel of the news of record. Now, databases of restaurant inspec- tion reports are ready-made for the Web. They give the public fingertip access to raw informa- tion about local eateries. 

WRAL's series began when a customer at a McDonald's restaurant in Raleigh, N.C., took a close look at its sanitation inspection report posted on the wall. Surprised, she called us to say that, while the local health department had awarded the McDonald's an "A" sanitation grade, the inspector had noted maggots growing in an unused ice cream machine. 

Making the grade 

So what does an "A" rating mean, anyway? We filed an Open Records Act request to get our county's database of sanitation in- spection reports to find out. Rules, however, vary from state to state. As we say in TV, check your local listings. 

North Carolina, South Carolina and Ne- vada are the only states that use A-B-C rat- ings. Most states still use variations of a 100- point scale. Some are moving toward the Food and Drug Administration's latest "model" food inspection rating system, which calls for a satisfactory/unsatisfactory approach that is obviously less conducive to computer- assisted reporting. 

North Carolina's database (including only one fourth of all counties) includes fields for type of violation, numbers of points de- ducted from a 100-point scale, final score and - most valuable of all - the inspector's comments. We found restaurants reportedly having maggots, raw sewage backups, and rats breeding in the dumpster that still re- ceived "A" ratings. 

Inspectors routinely cited restaurants for less sensational - though more hazardous - 

violations like food served at improper tem- peratures and raw meat contaminating cooked food, yet gave them "A" ratings as well. The inspectors aren't to blame. The state's 100-point system allows a maximum deduction of only five points for each type of violation - not each individual violation. So a restaurant with a series of relatively innocuous but different violations could score lower than a restaurant with a series of threatening but similar ones. As is the case with almost all computer- assisted reporting, the database was not the final story only the beginning of questions. We adopted the methodology used by Mike Wendland at WDIV-TV in Detroit: culling the lowest and highest scores, then looking at files at the health department to build a much smaller spreadsheet with at least 3 inspections for the group of low- scoring restaurants. 

Expecting surprise This removed the "just-had-a-bad-day" 

defense and showed restaurants that scored poorly over time. 

It also contained a surprise. Seven of the 10 lowest scoring restaurants posted "A" ratings. Because inspectors are required to re- inspect within 15 days, some restaurants would routinely score low on surprise inspec- tions then clean up their act. The lower and arguably more representative grade from the surprise inspection hangs in public view for two weeks tops; the higher grade from the not-so-surprise inspection hangs on the wall for public consumption for months until it's time for another surprise inspection. Our report aired just as the state was debating changing from letter grades to num- ber grades. So we were able to follow the debate with new information and context. Our experience is by no means unique. But in this instance, just because a topic has been covered well in another market does not mean your audience would not benefit from another treatment of it locally - especially if you can augment the on-air story with rel- evant information online. 

Stuart Watson can be reached at (919) 821-8705 or by e-mail at stuart@interpath.com 

2


INSPECTION Du JOUR 

Processor violations 

By Brent Johnson NICAR 

Hundreds of meat and poultry plants operating throughout the country are repeat- edly issued citations following inspections by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. But the enforcement record against these gutting op- erations has most often been gutless. An investigative story by Elliot Jaspin and Scott Montgomery of Cox News Service found that few plants ones cited hundreds of times - are ever forced shut by the USDA. 

Critical condition 

by the USDA as a plant condition "certain" to cause both food contamination and to reach and then harm consumers - occurred at given plants. "We were expecting 200 tops for a particular plant," Jaspin said. However, they found a poultry plant in Arkansas oper- ated by Tyson Foods that had amassed 1,700 violations. That's when they knew they had a story. 

Jaspin and Montgomery used FoxPro to analyze the massive "Feed- back File" database pro- vided by the USDA fol- lowing a FOIA request. Although they requested files from 1990-1996, the USDA only released in- formation from 1996. The reporters wanted to know how many "criti- cal violations" - defined 

File me up, file me down 

The USDA databasearrived on CD-ROM organized by a series of subdivisions. The data were. divided into quarters of the year. Each quarter was divided into 26 regions. Each region was divided by week. "So there were 13 zip files for each region, and within those, when unzipped, were different 'cir- cuits," or strings of meat and poultry plants, Jaspin said. "We're talking in the neighbor- hood of 5,000-6,000 little databases." 

"When you have large databases, the whole idea is to divide and conquer, to be able to work in a feasible fashion," Jaspin said. 

Transferring the data from the CD-ROM to the hard drive using a batch file presented the first challenge. Then appending the zip 

files into databases for each quarter awaited. "We had to smash (the unzipped files) into one large database actually four. One data- base would've been too unwieldy - over 25 million records." 

Divide and conquer 

Dirty data always lurks. Jaspin and Mont- gomery had to work around an identification problem. They thought each plant would have a unique number but then found indi- vidual plants entered multiple times. By clean- ing the unique number problem up, they could link violations from inspection records to particular plants by joining tables. 

Finally ready to ana- lyze the data, they cre- ated "subset databases" to answer particular ques- tions, such as the fre- quency of critical viola- tions occurring at plants. 

"When you have large databases, the whole idea is to divide and conquer, to be able to work in a feasible fashion," Jaspin said. 

Jaspin and Montgomery also analyzed the data by geographic distribution of violations and plant size. Smaller databases were created and sent to individual Cox newspapers so they could pursue local stories. 

USDA puts up, but doesn't shut down 

Through their database analysis of 1996 inspections, the reporters discovered 299 plants with 100 or more "critical violations" and 7 with more than 1,000 That year, the USDA shut down only 6 plants. 

"Heavens," an epidemiologist at the Cen- ters for Disease Control and Prevention told the reporters upon hearing those numbers. "The burning question is why is a plant with that many violations - why has the (federal) inspector not been pulled from that plant? And I have no idea." 

NICAR IS IN THE PROCESS OF ACQUIRING THE SUMMARY DATA OF THE USDA's PROCESS DEFICIENCY REPORTS, WHICH INCLUDE A LIST OF VIOLATIONS - CRITICAL, MAJOR OR MINOR - BY PLANT. 

Brent Johnson can be reached at (573) 882-0684 or by e-mail at bjohnson@nicar.org 

A PROFILE OF PAUL ADRIAN, AN INVESTIGATIVE REPORTER AT WBNS-TV IN COLUMBUS, OHIO, WHO HAS ALSO USED THE SUMMARY DATA IN A STORY, WILL APPEAR IN NEXT MONTH'S ISSUE. 

3


Continued from page one: 

Dirty kitchens 

ACCORDING TO STUART WATSON, HIS STATION'S RESTAURANT INSPECTION SERIES "DEMONSTRATED BETTER THAN ANY OF OUR PREVIOUS INVESTIGATIVE PROJECTS THE ABILITY OF WRAL ONLINE TO SUPPLEMENT ON-AIR REPORTS." HE PROVIDED WEB SITES FOR SIMILAR PROJECTS AT OTHER ORGANIZATIONS: 

WRAL ONLINE HTTP://www.WRAL- TV.COM/NEWS/WRAL/ 5INVESTIGATES/19971 REST-EVAL-DATA 

WDIV-TV DETROIT HTTP://www.WDIV.COM/ DD4.HTML 
WSB-TV AND THE ATLANTA JOURNAL- CONSTITUTION HTTP://WWW. 

ACCESSATLANTA.COM/ LOCAL/INSPECTIONS 

THE DESERET NEWS HTTP:1/199.104.95.5/MISC REST/RESTFORM.HTM 
KCBS-TV Los ANGELES HTTP:// 
www.CHANNEL2000.coM 

scores on their inspections. And if restaurants were failing every inspection, were they pe- nalized or shut down? 

Our analyis revealed that L.A. County's restaurant inspection system was not doing its job of protecting the public health. We found that many restaurants hadn't been inspected in over 2 years, even though the health department had previously insisted every place gets at least 3 inspections a year. We found that nearly 30 percent of L.A. area restaurants averaged poor to failing scores on health inspections. The data showed that most of these places were never penalized or closed down. 

Finally, NICAR ranked all 20,000 restau- rants from the lowest to highest scoring. We were amazed when we exam- ined that list. Some of the most respected and popu- lar restaurants in Los An- geles were also getting the worst inspection scores. 

Going undercover 

We then decided to conduct an under- cover investigation. Using the list that NICAR produced for us, we chose several low-scoring restaurants and sent researchers to work there. 

Our computer analysis and our under- cover tapes gave us enough material to do many stories. What was originally intended to be a 2-part series turned into an 11-part series. Our first story exposed filthy condi- tions at many popular L.A. restaurants and used facts from our computer analysis to show the problem was widespread. On the second day we exposed the failures of the inspection system to keep restaurants clean. 

We then did several stories using the rankings of restaurants by average inspection score. One story focused on the lowest-scor- ing restaurants in town; another highlighted the cleanest places. 

An activated audience 

KCBS was deluged with calls from viewers wanting to see the entire list of restaurant scores. We put that list on our Web site, www.Channel 2000.com. In the following weeks, it received an unprecedented one mil- lion hits. 

Two days after our first report, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors publicly grilled health department officials about the problems KCBS uncovered. The department then started cracking down. 

Our initial reports generated hundreds of tips, which gave us material for many solid follow-ups. We reported that a grand jury had warned the health department years earlier that there could be an epidemic of food poisoning if it didn't get tougher on unsanitary restau- 

rants. (The County ig- nored that warning). We also reported how the health department had a secret surplus of millions of dollars that it could've used to hire more restau- rant inspectors. 

Until we broke that story, health officials had been saying they wereshort on money to beef up their inspection program. 

What amazed us most was the fallout and public outcry from ourseries. Two days after our first report, the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors publicly grilled health department officials about the problems KCBS uncovered. The department then started cracking down, closing more than 300 unsani- tary restaurants, including one owned by Los Angeles Mayor Richard Riordan. Three weeks later, the board adopted a sweeping overhaul of Los Angeles County's restaurant inspection system. Because of our reports, restaurants must now post letter grades reflecting their latest inspection scores. And restaurant work- ers will be required to get training and certifi- cation in safe food-handling practices. Three months later, we are still doing follow-up stories from what we all thought would be just a basic investigative story. 

Joel Grover can be reached at (213) 460-3284 or by e-mail at lax@primenet.com 

4


Travel tabs 

Continued from page one: 

traveled most frequently, and which Con- gressional spouses earned the most frequent flyer miles. 

The new rules require members of Con- gress and their staffs to explain how such travel relates to their work and to disclose its sponsor, destination, cost and purpose within 30 days. 

Key findings 

The GNS database investigation found that private industry and non-profit groups spent nearly $8 million in 16 months on 5,100 trips. 

Other key findings in- cluded: China was the hot- test congressional travel destination; the Nuclear Energy Institute spent $123,000 on congres- sional travel while lobby- ing to send radioactive waste to Nevada during 1996-97; the tobacco in- dustry spent $70,000 on 27 trips for congressmen during the same period; and the House Commerce Committee, which oversees telecommunica- tions and electricity deregulation, topped the list of well-traveled congressional com- mittees, taking nearly 200 paid trips in 16 months. 

GNS chief political correspondent Chuck Raasch and regional correspondent Fredreka Schouten, together with Milliron, spent three months on the project. They collected the paper records on the more than 5,100 trips between January 1996 - when the new re- porting requirements kicked in - and early May 1997. The data from the reports was then keypunched by two interns into six Borland Paradox databases. 

Milliron said The Center for Responsive Politics subsequently keypunched the 1997 travel records, which is now available on its Web site. 

"I was pleased to see they picked up on this. We feel this is an important thing for the public to know," Raasch said. 

"This is the type of information Congress doesn't want in electronic form because it's too easy to see patterns among trips when it's in a computer database," Milliron said. 

"This is the type of information Congress doesn't want in electronic form because it's too easy to see patterns among trips when it's in a computer database," Milliron said. 

Roadblocks 

Milliron explained there were a few pit- falls during the project. Because the majority of the reports were handwritten, GNS had to painstakingly decipher the name of each trav- eler on the forms using various congressional directories. And many of the travel records identified sponsors not by company names but by acronyms, requir- ing additional research. Raasch said members of Congress also did a poor job of filling out the forms. Often, writing was illeg- ible or total expenses (in- cluding transportation, lodging, meals) vereadded incorrectly. 

And in one instance, Milliron said, House Speaker Newt Gingrich re- ported the cost of his trip in Swiss francs, which GNS converted to U.S. dollars using the exchange rate at the dates of his trip. 

"Ifthat's not trying to abate the system, I don't know what is," Milliron said. 

Included in the database were the trip sponsors, names of travelers, destinations and the cost and dates of travel. GNS created a separate database for travel related to com- mittee work. 

Once the analysis was complete for the national package, Milliron worked with the bureau's regional reporters, who wrote about three dozen stories on the travels of elected representatives serving their regions. 

Overall, Raasch said they were happy with the play the series received. 

"As we tried to point out, there are a lot of new ways or different ways for money to get into this process," Raasch said. 

THE 1997 

CONGRESSIONAL TRAVEL RECORDS CAN BE ACCESSED ON THE WEB SITE OF THE CENTER FOR RESPONSIVE POLITICS AT HTTP://www.CRP.ORG/ CRPDOCS/9798TRAVEL/ TRAV9798.HTM 

Kara Morisson can be reached by e-mail at kara@nicar.org 

5


QUICK HITS 

Demystifying CAR 

To FIND OUT HOW TO DOUBLE CHECK YOUR CITY'S MATH, ORDER "COMPUTER-ASSISTED REPORTING: A PRACTICAL GUIDE" BY BRANT HOUSTON. IT CAN BE ORDERED FROM NICAR AND INVESTIGATIVE REPORTERS AND EDITORS FOR $26 FOR IRE MEMBERS OR $30 FOR NON-MEMBERS PLUS SHIPPING. CALL (573) 882-2042. 

By Neil Reisner The Miami Herald 

Okay. You've heard one too many stories about the yearlong CAR investigation using umpity-two databases, way-too-sophisticated statistics and a Pentium II 300 with 556 mega- bytes of RAM and a 200-gigabyte hard drive. 

That just ain't the reality you live in. But you've also heard one too many sto- ries from one too many CAR wizards wearing a pointed cap with stars and crescents on it about the turn-on-a-dime quick hits that they produced merely by blinking their eyes. 

They can be done. With just a little bit of forethought, it's possible - even easy - to apply CAR to your everyday work, even to breaking news. 

That's what we've been doing at The Miami Herald's edition in Broward County, which, despite its connection to a major metro, is really not very different from a medium-sized daily. 

That's because we put out our own edi- tion of the paper in Broward with a remade front page, a local news section, bi-weekly neighbors sections, independent calendar list- ings, local sports - the whole package. We struggle along with the same limitations of staff and resources that confront most other papers. And we compete fiercely with the Sun-Sentinel of Fort Lauderdale, with whom we're at war. 

Here are four examples of the ways we've used CAR in recent months- to produce mega-stories but to add value to the routine. (And, for spice, examples of how we could have done better.) None took more than a day, and most were finished in several hours. 

Electing school boards 

Education is the big political issue here in Broward, where the local Board of Education has about the same credibility as used car dealers and the schools are overcrowded de- spite the fact that they've spent $2 billion on construction over the last 10 years. The ac- tion involved an election last fall deciding whether to scrap the traditional system of electing school board members at large for a system in which most members would repre- sent specific districts. 

The change won overwhelming approval, 

much to the surprise of some pundits (and school board members) who figured what we call the "condo vote", mostly elderly voters loyal to the locally ruling Democrats, would rally to the status quo. The question was: How did this happen? 

We covered election night as usual, down- loading overall results from a BBS run by the Superintendent of Elections. The day after the election, though, precinct-by-precinct results were available. Usually, they'd been provided on paper, but last year we got them on floppy disk in a tab-delimited ASCII format. 

From there, it was a simple matter to import the data using Excel's import wizard and then to move it over to Access. Teaming up with the political reporter, who knows the precincts like the back of his hand, we were able to isolate model precincts and analyze which way the vote went. The result: Young families and minorities came out in force to support a move they deemed important. The condo vote stayed home. With turnout only about 5 percent, it didn't take much to turn the election. 

Boating accidents 

It was a real tragedy. A powerboat - the kind dope smugglers and men in midlife crisis love - was speeding up the Intracoastal Waterway in the dark of the night when it ran over a small cabin cruiser out for a midnight cruise, just about cutting it in half. Six people died, and more were critically injured- ing it the worst boat accident in years and one that we covered intensely. 

We already had about ten years' worth of data on recreational boating accidents from the Florida Marine Patrol. The dirty little secret was that it was still in the fixed-field ASCII format it arrived in. That meant writ- ing import specifications for four tables with lots and lots of fields. And on deadline, in a competitive situation, that wasn't practical. (Remember what I said about "a little bit of forethought?" I should've imported it ahead of time.) 

NICAR to the rescue. A quick phone call to Missouri and the good folks at NICAR extracted five years' worth of Florida data for 

Continued on page seven 

6


Continued from page six: 

Breaking news 

us from the national data set they have. And may God bless the inventors of the Internet - within an hour it was winging its way into my e-mail box. 

Once in-house, it became clear that we'd only be able to use two years' worth of data because of changes in the field layout. But, with only a few straightforward queries, we were able to find out how many boating fatalities there had been during that time statewide and along our stretch of the coast, how many accidents, the boats most com- monly involved in accidents and the most common cause of accidents. We printed out the information, turned it over to a graphic artist and put the data in the next day's paper. We could have done better, though. As is too often the case, there was insufficient communication between the data guy (me), the reporter and the editor on the story. That meant the reporter didn't get the data soon enough and was insufficiently briefed on what it meant. Keeping everyone on the same page is real important. 

Multiple births 

A local woman gave birth to quadruplets a few months ago. And, of course, the hospi- tal PR folks were on the phone with us all agog and, of course, we prepared to go out and do something on the blessed event. (This was before the "Magnificent Seven" in Ohio made mere quadruplets passé.) 

Discussing this in the morning news meet- ing, an editor said words to the effect of: "Geez. Every time quads are born we take the same picture and write the same story. Can we do something different this time? I won- der how much it will cost to raise these kids?" 

We went out on the Web and found, oddly enough, a college professor's class lec- tures noting the USDA's annual cost esti- mate of child-rearing. A quick trip to the USDA site produced a press release announc- ing the most recent estimate and a full report on the estimates in .pdf format. The USDA estimates how much it costs to raise one child. But you can't just multiply that by four to get the cost or raising quads. 

A call to the contact named on the press release got us to a USDA economist who told us the formula we needed. Plugged it all into 

a spreadsheet and handed it off to the graph- ics guy. 

Religious migration 

With around 270,000 Jewish residents, Broward County makes up the fourth largest Jewish community in the country. That's why we pay a fair amount of attention to Jewish issues. So, when a long-established synagogue decided to sell its building to a charter school and move a few miles north to a more densely populated area, it was news. The local Jewish federation had recently released a demographic study of the local community with a table showing the number of Jewish residents in each ZIP code. They faxed it to us, and a few minutes later it was typed into a database table. We'd recently started playing with map- ping software and were fortunate enough to have a copy of ArcView. It didn't take much to hang the ZIP code table onto a base map of ZIP codes we'd gotten from the county. (Forethought worked here - the base map was all ready, completed by my colleague Dan Keating.) Once we drew the map, we saw clearly that the two ZIP codes surrounding the synagogue were among the densest Jewish areas in the county. And the area to which the congregation was moving was among the least populated. That let us ask much more focused ques- tions and explain that, even though the syna- gogue was located in a Jewish area, most of its members didn't live there. The area where the congregation was moving was closer to where most congregants lived and, more importantly, near a neighborhood where young Jewish families were moving. Were any of these stories prize-winners? Hardly. And, with the possible exception of mapping software, they didn't use any soft- ware other than the standard spreadsheets, database managers and web browsers we all have. It's just a matter of thinking about the stories we're writing and how a little bit of data can make them better. Neil Reisner, formerly NICAR training director, can be reached at (954) 985-4571 or by e-mail at inreisner@web2000.net 

BOUND COPIES OF THE 1997 ISSUES OF UPLINK ARE NOW AVAILABLE. CONTACT IRE AT (573) 882-2042. THE COST IS $25 FOR IRE MEMBERS OR $30 FOR NON-MEMBERS, PLUS SHIPPING. 

7


ADVANCED SEMINAR 

THE ADVANCED SEMINAR DREW A SELLOUT CROWD FROM THE SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS, USA TODAY, DETROIT FREE PRESS, BALTIMORE SUN, DAILY OKLAHOMAN, LEXINGTON HERALD- LEADER, ASSOCIATED PRESS AND WCCO-TV IN MINNEAPOLIS. 

Client/server solutions 

GEORGE LANDAU AND TOM TOROK WILL REPEAT THEIR SEMINAR ON WEB APPLICATIONS WITH NT AND SQL SERVER THIS SUMMER, 

AUGUST 14-17. FOR MORE INFORMATION OR TO REGISTER, CONTACT KATY FANNING AT (573) 882-0684. 

By George Landau NewsEngin Inc. 

Take a dozen experienced CAR jockeys from around the nation, lock them in a NICAR computer lab for three days at the mercy of two hard-core data wonks, and what do you get? 

For starters, you get a dozen CAR jockeys who can install and maintain a Web-based, client/server data warehouse for their news- rooms. And you get to brag about the success- ful inaugural run of NICAR's advanced semi- nar. 

The advanced seminar arose from a basic question that our crowd has been wrestling with for quite a while: how can CAR special- ists manage their valuable data so that the newsroom can perform basic queries without bugging the specialist, and perform fancier queries without a lot of logistical hassles and network slowdowns? 

The answer is a client/server database manager with a Web interface. For this par- ticular seminar, the teachers - myself and Tom Torok of the Philadelphia Inquirer - instructed our colleagues in the 100% Microsoft solution that consists of Windows NT as the operating system, SQL Server as the database manager, and Internet Informa- tion Server (IIS) as the Web server. This all- Microsoft lineup is certainly not the only way to go, but Torok and I believe it provides a strong combination of low-cost, high-per- formance and predictable results. Besides, what journalist really wants to learn UNIX? 

Day One 

We began with an hour-long discussion of client/server databases and Web technol- ogy - why they make sense for sharing data within a newsroom. The idea behind client/ server is that the database queries run on a beefy PC (the server), which accepts com- mands over a network in the form of SQL statements. The server executes the SQL statement and passes only the results back over the network to the user (the client). The client software can be a Web browser or a desktop data tool like Access, Approach, Paradox or Excel. The client software can use a graphical interface, like a Web form or the Access query builder, to generate the 

SQL statements; your users don't have to know SQL. 

Client/server is generally a better solution than simply putting an Access or FoxPro database on a server and letting your users open the database over the network. While this might work for simple queries on in- dexed fields, for anything more ambitious it means pumping the entire database through the narrow (and typically congested) pipes of your network. This tends to make the net- work crawl for everyone else in your news- room, especially the folks in photo who in- evitably need to move several large images at the same time your query is scanning a 1- gigabyte table. 

So that they could repeat the process in their own newsrooms, led the participants through the entire drill of installing Win- dows NT Server, SQL Server, IIS and the numerous bug fixes ("Service Packs") that Microsoft provides subsequent to any product's release. Fortunately, we hit just enough snags in this process to make for an authentic experience, and by day's end each participant was the new administrator of a fully-loaded NT Server. 

Day Two 

We spent the morning learning about security, configuration and administration in NT Server, SQL Server and IIS. We sailed through the creation of SQL Server devices, databases, tables, views and indexes. We dabbled with various settings and discussed ways to maximize performance. 

Once we had a grip on SQL Server, we used ODBC (Open Data Base Connectivity) to connect from Microsoft Access to SQL Server over the network. We transferred data from Access to SQL Server using ODBC alone and in combination with SQL Server's BCP (Bulk Copy Program). 

With some data on the server, it was time to install a Web interface. NewsEngin provided all seminar participants with an application called UniQuery and a license to deploy it in their newsrooms. UniQuery's greatest value lies in its ability to perform global searches of the databases on your server. A user can enter a name, address, birthdate, etc.; regardless of 

Continued on page nine 

8


Continued from page eight: 

Managing CAR 

what those fields are actually called, in the particular tables being searched, the user gets back search hits in the form of hyperlinked data to follow to related or detailed data. 

UniQuery is written as an Active Server Pages (ASP) application, which is essentially a version of Visual Basic for Microsoft's Web server. Microsoft has positioned ASP as the language of choice for NT applications (like UniQuery) that do most of their work on the Web server, as opposed to the browser. 

Day Three 

Using an online workbook he'd written as an ASP application, Torok guided everyone through the key steps in building a Web application that can query or collect data. ASP applications are just Web pages that 

contain ordinary HTML and Visual Basic Script (the text aspect of VB - the "If...Then," "For...Next' kind of stuff). Among the topics he covered were the use of conditional logic and loops, input forms, the "post" and "get" HTTP actions, input vali- dation, URL redirection, dynamically gener- ated hyperlinks, submit buttons, the "re- quest," "response" and "session" objects, string functions, numeric functions, database que- rying and database navigation. It was an awesome performance that left folks wishing for a fourth day spend more time applying it all. Alas, most of us had a plane to catch. But there's always e-mail... George Landau can be reached by e-mail at george@newsengin.com 

HEALTH CARE WORKSHOP 

Risky Behavior 

By Seth Hemmelgarn NICAR 

When you're talking about things like margins of error, chi-squares and weighted data, it's easy to sound esoteric. But journal- ists and epidemiologists from around the country transcended the stereotype Jan. 23 25 at the first-ever Risky Behavior health care conference. Sponsored by IRE and NICAR and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the workshop gave journalists and epidemiologists the chance to share ideas and concerns face-to-face. "Workshops Risky Behavior put beat- specific, analysis-oriented sessions over geekism," said David Heath, director of com- puter-assisted reporting at the St. Louis Post- Dispatch. "I think that they serve to make CAR more relevant in the newsroom." People on both sides came away from the conference with a new appreciation for each other. "I think the researchers learned just as much about how reporters are using CAR as we learned about the rigors of social science," said Paul Garber, CAR specialist at the Post- Dispatch. 

The two groups have at least one common goal: giving people accurate information. Both 

sides use extensive research to do this. 

A large part of the seminar was spent discussing the CDC's Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System. The survey questions in the system cover topics ranging from seatbelt use to AIDS testing. Answers are compiled in a database that the CDC makes available. 

Sarah Cohen, NICAR training director, taught participants how to get statistics from the data using SPSS, a statistics program that lets users compile statistics with the push of a button. 

"The statistics-speak was pretty under- standable," said Diane Targovnik, news edi- tor of Managed Health Care News. "All the speakers emphasized that you can't look at data and run to a conclusion." One researcher clarified for Heath that with enough interest and perseverance, any- one can do fairly sophisticated analysis. "Not that I expect many reporters to start doing double-blind trials," Heath said. The conference also included informa- tion on other types of health-care data, where to get it and how to use it. A Web site with follow-up information is in the works. Seth Hemmelgarn can be reached by e- mail at seth@nicar.org 

RISKY BEHAVIOR ATTENDEES CAME FROM 

THE CHICAGO-TRIBUNE, ST. LOUIS POST- 

DISPATCH, CINCINNATI ENQUIRER, BUFFALO NEWS, 

DES MOINES REGISTER, STAR TRIBUNE, PLAIN DEALER, DAYTON DAILY NEWS, NEWSDAY, MANHATTAN MERCURY, COLUMBUS DISPATCH, COLUMBIA DAILY TRIBUNE, WILLOUGHBY NEWS- HERALD, BELLEVILLE NEWS- DEMOCRAT, MANAGED HEALTH CARE NEWS, CBS-KWTV, WAYNE STATE UNIVERSITY AND CREIGHTON UNIVERSITY. 

A SECOND SEMINAR IN KANSAS CITY IS TENTATIVELY SCHEDULED FOR SEPTEMBER 1998. CHECK THE IRE WEB SITE FOR THE LATEST ON UPCOMING WORKSHOPS AND SEMINARS AT WWW.IRE.ORG 

9


FIRST VENTURES 

Evaluating educators 

JIM LUDWICK ATTENDED NICAR's BASIC BOOT CAMP IN JANUARY AND IMMEDIATELY BEGAN APPLYING THE SKILLS HE LEARNED. IF YOU HAVE RECENTLY STARTED USING CAR TECHNIQUES, LET US HEAR ABOUT YOUR EXPERIENCES. E-MAIL BRENT JOHNSON AT BJOHNSON@NICAR.ORG 

By Jim Ludwick The Missoulian 

My first project after boot camp began on the day I returned to the office. Rod Murphy, the associate editor, told me that our educa- tion reporter had been trying to determine how various schools had compared in their standardized achievement-test results, that had just become public under a new state law. 

The reporter, Gary Jahrig, had been over- whelmed by paperwork he'd received from Using the Access database manager, I the state Office of Public Instruction, nearly produced tables for each subject at each grade 200 pages, covering many level. My tables listed ev- of the schools in our circu- The package was ery school in our circula- lation area, and wasn't sure published on Jan. 25. tion area, ranked in order how to make sense out of of scores from highest to the data. I suggested that My last day at boot lowest. The tables in- we could get the Office of camp was Jan. 9. cluded four fields: the Public Instruction to give school, its county, the us the file for the entire state of Montana in score, and the number of students who had computerized form. taken the test. 

Producing in Access 

Training results 

Once I linked my database to the material supplied, I could easily identify schools in our circulation area and compare their results to the state as a whole. The data covered test results from the fourth, eighth and eleventh grades, showing an average score for each school in each of five subject areas: reading, language arts, math, science and social stud- ies. 

I'd attended training at NICAR in early January. I had previous experience, but the NICAR training had been useful for several reasons: it helped me learn to use the latest software; it gave me experience in combining databases; and it provided valuable advice about obtaining and using data from govern- ment sources. 

When I contacted the Office of Public Instruction, Inegotiated an appropriate price for the material: no charge. 

The data was on a spreadsheet file, for Lotus 1-2-3. I moved the material to Excel, and from there to Access. 

I wanted to identify the schools from particular counties, but the Office of Public Instruction had used code numbers instead of county names. I got a list of the code numbers for each county, and quickly cre- ated a database with three fields: the code number, the county name and a designation that indicated whether the county was in the circulation area of our newspaper. 

Package delivery 

A package was published in the Sunday paper. Jahrig wrote the wrap-up story. After interviews with the state superintendent of public instruction and others, he wrote about the test results, the reaction and controversy relating to the use of standardized testing. Another reporter, John Stromnes, wrote a sidebar focusing on one elementary school that had been especially successful. I helped deal with the table and wrote explanatory articles to accompany them. I also made numerous checks and re-checks to make sure I had not asked Access the wrong questions. 

The package was published on Jan. 25. My last day at boot camp was Jan. 9. 

Ialready have three other database projects underway. Two involve data I brought home from NICAR. 

Jim Ludwick can be reached at (406) 523-5253 or by e-mail at jimludwick@marsweb.com 

10


ON THE INTERNET 

Soup's On 

By Nora Paul The Poynter Institute 

To keep up with this month's food in- spection stories, this column will link you to good sites with background, glossaries, and resources food inspections, food-borne illnesses and other things that will help you cover these important topics and help those of us who made dieting resolutions for New Year's very glad to never eat anything ever again! 

The Bad Bug Book 

http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/-mow/intro.html The handbook on food-bornepathogenic microorganisms and natural toxins. Iowa State University Extension: Food Safety 

Project 

http://www.exnet.iastate.edu/Pages/families/ fs/homepage.html 

This has got it all. Read Food Safety News daily for story tips and leads and use their list of links to other food safety news sources. Learn how to join the Food Safety Netlistserv for daily updates. Use their excellent compi- lation of other food safety sites to jump to for background and explainers on different food safety issues. 

U.S. Food and Drug Administration: Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition http://vm.cfsan.fda.gov/list.html 

A well organized collection of pamphlet type material on all aspects of food safety and handling. Good consumer background and 

tips as well as technical explanations of some food-borne illnesses and concerns. USDA/FDA Food-borne Illness Education Information Center: Food Safety Index http://www.nal.usda.gov/fnic/foodborne/ fbindex/index.htm Get the full-text of the FDA 1997 Food Code and a nice list of listservs to join. Glossary of Epidemiologic Terms http://www.cvm.uiuc.edu/courses/vp350/ glossary.html If terms like "Extrinsic incubation pe- riod" and "gold standard" and "horizontal transmission" are being thrown at you dur- ing the interview, be sure you know what they are referring to by using this glossary. Check out a couple of the Poynter Institute's Hot News / Hot Research items on food-borne illnesses and outbreaks, re- searched by David Shedden: 

Hong Kong Bird Virus http://www.poynter.org/research/hr/ hr_010598.htm Tainted Strawberries Served in School Lunch Lead to Hepatitis Outbreak http://www.poynter.org/research/hr/ hr_040397.htm Mad Cow Disease http://www.poynter.org/research/hr/ hr_032696.htm Nora Paul can be reached at (313) 821-9494 or by e-mail at npaul@poynter.org 

IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO SEE TIPS ON HOW TO BEST UTILIZE THE INTERNET FOR A PARTICULAR TOPIC, SEND AN E-MAIL TO NORA PAUL AT NPAUL@POYNTER.ORG OR BRENT JOHNSON AT BJOHNSON@NICAR.ORG. ALSO VISIT THE POYNTER INSTITUTE'S WEB SITE AT wWW.POYNTER.ORG FOR INTERNET TIPSHEETS. 

IRE/NICAR NOTES 

Upcoming Events 

March 23 - 24, 1998 - Washington, DC NICAR/Medill Intermediate CAR Workshop March 27-29, 1998 - New York, NY IRE Broadcast Workshop May 10-15, 1998 - Chapel Hill, NC NICAR Advanced Boot Camp May 17-22, 1998 - Columbia, MO NICAR Basic Boot Camp June 47, 1998 - New Orleans, LA IRE National Conference featuring panels for every beat, TV Show and Tell and optional day of CAR June 14 - 16, 1998 - Washington, DC NICAR/Medill Basic CAR Workshop July 12-17, 1998 - Columbia, MO NICAR Basic Boot Camp 

July 24-27, 1998 - Miami, FL On-the-road training for the National Association of Hispanic Journalists Convention '98 July 29-August 3, 1998 - Washington, D.C. On-the-road training for the National Association of Black Journalists Convention '98 August 5-8, 1998 - Chicago, IL On-the-road training for the Asian American Jour- nalists Association Convention '98 August 9-14, 1998 - Columbia, MO NICAR Basic Boot Camp December 10 - 12, 1998 - Washington, DC NICAR/Medill Basic CAR Workshop 

IF YOU HAVE ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT AN UPCOMING IRE OR NICAR EVENT, OR WOULD LIKE TO REGISTER, PLEASE CONTACT OUR MAIN OFFICE AT (573) 882-0684 OR E-MAIL INFO@NICAR.ORG. 

11


STATS FROM THE ROAD 

Wipe away math fears 

SARAH COHEN'S STATS COLUMN THIS MONTH IS A CONTINUATION OF HER ADVICE ON MATH SKILLS NEEDED BY ALL REPORTERS. IF YOU HAVE TIPS OR SUGGESTIONS ABOUT WHAT NUMBERS REPORTERS OUGHT TO KNOW, OR HOW TO OVERCOME MATH PHOBIA, CALL HER OR SEND HER AN E-MAIL. 

By Sarah Cohen NICAR 

You probably fear math and numbers far less than you suspect. Most reporters can figure a tip on a restaurant tab. They can split the bill easily. Many invest, buy homes, and work with other complex financial calcula- tions regularly. And, unlike me, most can and do balance their checkbooks. 

Here are some tricks to get you started in your quest to conquer your math phobia. 

Trick #1: Round off. 

If you're talking about the population of the U.S., don't think of 270 million. Think of 250. Or 300. That makes it easy to get a gut feeling of scale. If 12 percent of the U.S. is African-American, round that off to 10 percent, or 15 percent. Now just figure a tip on a $30 dinner bill - somewhere between $3.00 and $4.50 if you're frugal. So the number you're seeking is somewhere be- tween 30 and 45 million people. 

The lesson: Think in small, round, num- bers that correspond to something you'd be able to figure out in real life: a tip, a 25- percent-off sale, a 10-percent raise. You can change the scale of virtually every number you'll see to get to that point. 

Trick #2: Develop a sense of scale. 

Another trick is borrowed from John Allen Paulos' book, Innumeracy. The book is filled with what Paulos calls simple exercises, which few of us think are simple. It does, though, include one remarkably effective piece of advice: Learn to guess the numbers you look up before you look them up. Being wrong, as you almost always will be, will help cementi your mind the correct answer. 

If you guessed that the U.S. had an economy of $450 billion, and you learned through research that it is closer to $8 trillion, you'll remember your error every time you need to use the number. It also means you'll no longer think of a billion as the biggest number you can imagine, the way an editor did when she changed the word 'billion' to 'million' in a story because she thought it was simply too big to be true. 

I once admitted to my boss, jokingly, that I didn't pay attention to numbers - they all looked the same to me. He exploded. He rightly mentioned, not so politely, that I couldn't possibly know whether something was right or reasonable if I had no frame of reference. If I didn't know that the Nixon administration slapped on price controls when inflation was only 6 percent year, how could I possibly call any inflation rate 'small' or 'large'? 

You 'll have different scales that are impor- tant to your beat: How long the typical person lives, the number of people in your community, or the market share of General Motors. Developing your instinct of what's big and what's little will cut seemingly com- plex issues down to size, eliminating the meaningless numbers and focusing on the important ones. 

Trick #3: Watch television news. 

Broadcasters have far less freedom to bore readers with meaningless numbers. In any story, you may quibble with the number the reporter chose to focus on. But you'll become more selective in your use of numbers and avoid the all-too-common story construc- tion of anecdote, nut graf, then numbers you hope your readers will avoid. 

Trick #4: Ask your best sources for help. 

People love sharing certain kinds of se- crets. They usually involve secrets that will show you how much they know or how clever they are. 

You might ask your county budget direc- tor to show you the math (and the spread- sheets) she uses when she develops the budget each year. You might ask the academic au- thor of a new study to walk through some of the methodology with you. You'll become more adept at listening to people talk about numbers - something that has to come while you try to overcome your fear. 

Sarah Cohen can be reached at (301) 942-2199 or by e-mail at sarah@nicar.org 

12


TECH TIP 

Converting dates in Access 

By Richard Mullins 

NICAR/The Missouri School of Journalism One of the most common data cleanup needs is converting date information. The two-step process and the concepts for doing this are the same for FoxPro and Access. Arrange the numerals in mmddyy order and put in legal separators (hyphens or slashes) between month, day and year. This result may look like a date, but it's still a string of characters that you can't use for calendar math or date arithmetic. Step two is required to convert this correctly arranged date string into a date data type. 

The only differences are in the details, which are minor, like the British and the American ways spelling "realisation." Other Tech Tips have explained the FoxPr steps. This one will show the Access how-to. 

The word string is used a lot when talking about computer databases. But it's not a technical term; it's a good metaphor that helps you think about what you can do with strings of characters - cut them apart and tie them together. String functions are what you use for the cutting apart. The ampersand symbol is how you tie pieces together. 

You only need two string functions: one that picks out a certain number of characters starting from the left, and another that picks out a certain number of characters starting anywhere in the string. 

Assume a table with date of birth informa- tion, stored in a character field. I'll call that field cDOB, for "character date of birth." The new field to hold the date data-type I'll call DOB. 

If the cDOB column has data like 112184 then step one involves arranging it into 11/ 21/84. 

Here are the string functions to do that. Left (cdob, 2) & "/" & Mid (cdob, 3, 2) & "/" & Mid (cdob, 5, 2) 

If the date information looked like 841121, you' rearrange the pieces accord- ingly to get the same result of mm/dd/yy. 

Step two is converting this character rep- resentation of a date into a date datatype. 

In Access, this means wrapping CVDate() around the entire command above. Since there are already lots of parentheses, I spread out the two parentheses belonging to CVDate(to make things clearer. (In Access SQL, anywhere you can put one space, you can put several, or even a new line.) 

CVDate ( Left ( cdob, 2) & "/" & Mid ( cdob, 3, 2) & "/" & Mid ( cdob, 5, 2) ) 

Putting this fragment together in an up- date query for our example table (called Employees) looks like this: 

UPDATE employees SET dob = CVDate ( Left ( cdob, 2) & "/" & Mid ( cdob, 3, 2) & "/" & Mid ( cdob, 5, 2) ) 

This works, but know that dataisn't perfect. Not all combinations of numbers that may have been typed into a government database to represent a real calendar date actually will. We know, and Access knows, that there is no such date as the 30th of February or the 41st of November. If your update query finds any invalid character dates like this, you'll get this message: 

Microsoft Access can't update all the records in the update query. 

Microsoft Access didn't update field (s) due to a type conversion failure, 

Click the Yes button to go ahead with the update. All the character dates that couldn't be converted to a calendar date will be set to empty or Null. Run a query to show all the rows where the date column you just updated is Null. SELECT * FROM employees WHERE dob is Null Richard Mullins can be reached by e-mail at richard@nicar.org 

Have a suggestion for a Tech Tip or have a technical problem that is stumping you? 

E-mail Richard Mullins at richard@nicar.org with your ideas or questions. 

13


OSHA 

Highlights from the Database Library 

THE PRICE LISTING FOR ALL DATABASES AVAILABLE FROM NICAR CAN BE ACCESSED ONLINE AT WwW.NICAR.ORG/DATA 

IF YOU WOULD LIKE TO SEE A PARTICULAR DATABASE IN NICAR's LIBRARY DISCUSSED IN DETAIL, SEND AN E-MAIL TO JUSTIN MAYO AT JUSTIN@NICAR.ORG 

By Justin Mayo NICAR 

Computer-assisted reporters unite! Now available is a database that NICAR recently updated and that the federal agency oversee- ing worker well-being maintains. 

The Occupational Safety and Health Ad- ministration database is cumulative from 1974 through November 1997. NICAR will slice off information from your state or you can order the entire U.S. database on 4 CDs. 

The OSHA database includes 4 tables that may be analyzed separately or joined using the activity number field appearing in each one. Here are the tables and some of the information they contain: 

OSHA: The main table which gives company sites, previous violations, the num- ber of workers employed at the site in the previous 12 months and other OSHA activ- ity at the sites, such as inspections or com- plaints. 

Accidents: Names those injured, identi- fies the task that was being performed when the accident occurred, indicates whether a hazardous substance contributed to the acci- dent, lists which body parts were injured, and indicates the degree of the injury - for ex- ample, whether it was fatal. 

Hazardous Substances: Describes acci- dents that involve hazardous substances but that do not involve people. 

Violations: Details penalties, types of violations - willful, repeat, serious, the number of employees exposed to the danger. 

Although this relational database struc- ture can be tricky, it should not scare off CAR neophytes. St. Louis Post-Dispatch reporter, Virginia Baldwin Hick, first used OSHA data in a St. Louis Post-Dispatch series that examined local workplace falls that resulted in fatalities. 

"I cut my teeth in computer-assisted re- porting by using OSHA data," Hick says. "OSHA had just put into place new regula- tions on fall protection. I featured how these regulations were supposed to save lives." 

Here are some tips Hick, former Post- 

Dispatch reporter Natalya Shulyakovskaya and reporter Russell Carollo, who used OSHA at the Dayton Daily News, offer for handling the data. 

Use ZIP codes. "Some companies had many, many locations," Carollo says. "If you used company names, like General Motors, you'd end up with a zillion hits. We used ZIP codes to identify locations." 
Look for deaths. "One of the more interesting queries is to look for citations that result from fatalities," Carollo says. "Once you've got those, you can get all the paper- work on it because somebody's dead. Then rank those in order of monetary fines." 
Find the survivors. "Look through the data field of fatalities, find the names and look up the survivors early Hicksays "Ithelped me focus my story and focus my interviews. We're not talking about meaningless data; we're talking about lives. If you zero in on that story, you see how other things fit." 

Examine penalty fields carefully. "There are actually three different amounts of penal- ties that you will see for each inspection," Shulyakovskaya says. First comes from the OSHA table; it's called 'total current penal- ties' and represents the initially assessed fine. Second is the 'current penalty reflecting changes and modifications', which indicates the fine negotiated between the company and OSHA. It appears in the violations table. Third is the 'total penalty dollars remitted for the inspection, which what was actually paid. This appears in the OSHA table. 

Take advantage of SIC codes. "Wedidn't get into looking at OSHA for dangerous occupations because the occupation field is rarely filled in," Hick says, "but standard industrial codes (SIC) are listed. These are standard codes used throughout federal gov- ernment. SIC codes indicate how the indus- try is classified in the federal bureaucracy. You can find out which types of industries have the most fatalities." Justin Mayo is Database Administrator at NICAR. He can be reached at (573) 884-7711 or by e-mail at justin@nicar.org 

14


HANDOUT OF THE MONTH 

Health care hints 

By Sarah Cohen NICAR 

Whether you care about doctors, man- aged care companies, insurance or employee benefits, there's no shortage of data sources for stories in the beat. Each piece of the industry is either heavily regulated or heavily supported by taxpayers, making the records readily available. Here's a taste of what's waiting for you. 

Hospitals and nursing homes 

It's easiest to start with the biggest, most subsidized and often still regulated industries. Hospital Discharge Databases: The motherlode of data for health care reporters is often in what's known as the "discharge database" for each state. Not all states release it. An alterna- tive is the federal Medicare database of hospi- tal discharges, which includes less detail about doctors but adds an important element - whether the patient was readmitted or died soon after release. Discharge data has been used to document the shift toward shorter hospital stays, to find doctors who would talk about reasons for leaving certain hospitals, to identify list prices, or to figure out which procedures managed care companies will cover. 

Hospital financial records: Don't think these are only for business stories. They include important information on the staffing levels hospitals, the amount of charity caregiven, and you can estimate how much a nonprofit actually spends-rather than charges-on the care it gives away in return for its special status. Often available through your state health agency or a hospital association in a simpler form. 

Medicare cost reports: Any Medicare service that's based on costs rather than fixed prices has become a windfall for some companies. They get paid on the honor system. Then they submit the costs to justify it. Medicare sells these records. 

Medicare labor rates: Average wages in each area are used to determine how much hospi- tals in each area are paid under Medicare. You can use them to figure out how much (or little) employees in your area are making in hospitals. 

Insurance records 

These are all under state law, You'll often have to type in the simpler records, like financial reports, yourself. But others are available on tape or database in many states. Malpractice payouts: This is a list of every malpractice claim paid through insurers. In Tampa, reporters found a doctor who had been sued repeatedly over a controversial orthopedic procedure, which included wash- ing bones he used in the operation with a garden hose in his backyard. 

Worker's compensation claims: Some private vendors sell acess to workers' comp claims by employer. 

Financial records: Any Medicare HMO and many Medicaid HMOs are required to main- tain a certain number of private-pay patients, usually through employers. As one official put it, "private industry will demand stan- dards" that regulators can't enforce. Look for HMOs that depend too heavily on Medicare payments. If nothing else, Medicare can cut them off from the program. 

Physician and other professional records 

Yes, the National Practitioners Databank is closed to us. But some companies are compiling records held in it and selling them to anyone who wants to check on disciplin- ary actions against their doctors in other states. Other databases that may come in handy are: 

UPIN numbers: These are the key identifiers that doctors get so they can get paid by Medicare. Having UPINs will open a world of information to you, especially if you get billing records. The tape costs about $200 from the Health Care Finance Agency. Corporate records and partnerships: As physi- cians form associations to vie for managed care contracts, you can learn more about their business dealings by looking through your state's corporate records. Check the 990 summaries at www.irs.ustreas.gov and look under Statistics of Income for the Exempt Organization master list. Sarah Cohen can be reached at (301) 942-2199 or by e-mail at sarah@nicar.org 

THIS IS AN EXCERPT FROM THE IRE NATIONAL CONFERENCE IN PHOENIX IN JUNE, 1997. To ACCESS THE PHOENIX HANDOUTS, VISIT IRE's WEB SITE AT WWW.IRE.ORG/ RESOURCES/CONFERENCES 

To ORDER A COPY OF ANY HANDOUT THAT APPEARS IN UPLINK, CALL THE IRE RESOURCE CENTER AT (573) 882-3364. 

CHECK OUT MEDICARE'S WEB SITE AT WWW.HCFA.GOV, THEN CHOOSE THE DATA AREA TO DOWNLOAD A LIST OF DOZENS OF DATABASES MEDICARE SELLS TO HEALTH CARE CONSULTANTS. 

15


Bits, Bytes and Barks 

Membership Message 

You can join IRE via our Web server, or you can download a copy of our membership form in Adobe Acro- bat format from the Web site and submit it by fax to (573) 882-5431. For more information, check out http://www.ire.org/ membership.html IRE Memberships are $40 for professional journalists and journalism educators, $25 for students and $55 for international journalists. For a detailed account of what IRE has to offer, contact the IRE main office at (573) 882- 2042. 

NICAR Net 

Talk in never cheap on the IRE and NICAR listservs. A wealth of topical discussion awaits you. To subscribe to IRE-L or NICAR-I, send e-mail to listproc@lists.missouri.edu In the body of the message, type: subscribe NICAR-L<your name> subscribe IRE-L<your name> Also, check out the IRE-L and NICAR-L mailing list archives on our website at http://www.ire.org and http:// www.nicar.org. You can see posts to both lists organized by thread, author and date. The list archives are available in html or in plain text format. 

Moving on 

IRE board member Shawn McIntosh has moved from The Dallas Morning News to become managing editor at The Clarion-Ledger in Jackson, Miss. If you have recently switched locales, let us know of your whereabouts. 

Campaign Finance 

Jack Dolan, director of the Campaign Finance Informa- tion Center, is continuing to update the CFIC Web site at http://www.campaignfinance.org. Campaign contribution data is now available from 6 states - Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Minnesota, Ohio and Wisconsin. The data can be easily downloaded, and com- parisons can be made by joining tables between the state files. CFIC hopes to enable such comparisons to be made online once common fields are established and standard- ized. CFIC's overriding goal is to acquire campaign contri- bution data from as many states as possible to allow national contribution patterns to be discerned. The CFIC Web site also has added new stories to its story library, links to related Web sites and the inaugural issue of the newsletter Tracker. To subscribe to the newly formed CFIC listserv, send an e-mail to majordomo@campaignfinance.org In the body of the message, type subscribe CFIC-L yourname <your e- mail address>. 

11759 'OW

987°ON LINDED

Ali

S'N

CHOCO-NON


11759 OW

JO looyps

unoss JO

HON 8EI

pue
