plink A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

January/February 1999 

CREATING CONTRIBUTION DATABASES 

Charting campaign cash 

By Cindy Eberting CFIC 

Building a database to track campaign contri- butions is nothing new to computer-assisted re- porting. But the best way to do it is in question. 

Campaign finance consultants are popping up and pitching their service to newsrooms to design and maintain such a darabase. They say, an in-house project wastes money and ties up reporter time with tedious work, such as cod- ing contributors for occupation. Many news- papers, however, still opt to create their own database. 

There are advantages to both methods. And 

Defied laws, diseased labor 

By Gardiner Harris The Courier Fournal 

Nearly three:decades after Congress passed laws intended end the disease, black lung still kills nearly 500 coal miners each year. The Courter Journal (Louisville Ky) decided to determine why. After more than a year of work, we printed in April a series concluding that the deaths result because coal operators, aided by miners themselves routinely defy féderal laws designed to control mine dust levels. We broadly accused much of the coal industry of gross criminal negligence. We specifically accused one of reastern Kentucky largest mining operations of routinely breaking mine-safery laws. We were able to make these accusa- tions because we interviewed hundreds of miners and analyzed more than 7 million computer records. Industry rep- Continued on page two 

both tactics have resulted in more in-depth election coverage. Here are tips from consult- ants and reporters about how to approach tracking your local political cash flow. 

The biggest hurdle, says consultant Tony Raymond of Public Disclosure, Inc., can be convincing editors that the time, effort and money needed to build a good campaign fi- nance database are worthwhile. The key is to point to stories other newspapers have pro- duced with such databases and the state laws that changed once the stories ran. 

BLACK-LUNG PERSISFENCE 

"The cost ofi it can be a deterrent," Raymond says. "But the benefit of a campaign finance database is that it can be used for more than campaign finance stories. Say someone in the metro area gets stopped for DUI. It's a good place to throw his name at the database and see if he is a player in the community." 

David Poole, a reporter-turned-consultant who helped build campaign finance databases for statewide newspaper consortiums in New York and Virginia, says both his projects have changed state campaign finance practices. 

"In Virginia, the newspapers have com- pletely helped change the equation," Poole says. "There are more and more candidates that are beginning to file electronically. These projects are a way for the newspapers to have a positive effect on some positive change." 

Once editors are convinced, the careful work of planning the database begins. It's important to think ahead about every angle from which the databases will be analyzed. 

"We try to suggest a database format," Raymond says. "We know that once the data- base happens, and people see it inside the newsroom, then the next thing they say is: 'I'd like to see this or that.' If you don't set it up right the first time, you have to do the whole thing again." 

Last fall, The Washington Post hired Public Continued on page six 

Inside Uplink 

The January/February 1999 ISSUE IS a grab bag of CAR surprises, with stories on campaign finance crime and transportation Cindy Eberting of CHIC details the bénefits and chal lenges oficonstructing? data base of campaign contribus tions. An explanation of the streamlined CFIC Web SITE IS: also inside on page 18 Bob Warner or the Phila delphia Daily News explains hus analyis of the price of and travel on: the busiest routes Andy Lehren of Date line NBC revisits a safery oryinvolving the illegal sell ing of vans to schools and lax efforts to enforce the law. A compilation of conference handouts OFF the transportar tion beatherms on page 12 Gardiner Harris of The Courier Journal discusses a story on black-lung disease that concluded coal mine op- erators systematically defied federal dust-level laws spe- cifically passed ite end the disease 

Carol Napolitano of the Omaha World Herald OUR lines Jessons from her CAR intensive Omaha Crime series and Web project Naomi Aoki of The Virgin -Pilot provides ups on mapping crime. 

Uplink Family 1999 Vol IT Numbers and newsletter of the National Institute for Computer Assisted Reporting EDITOR Brant Houston brant@nica.org MANAGING EDITOR Brent Johnson bjohnson@mica.com SENIOR CONTRBUSSNG EDITORS Bruzzese ten@ire.org Sarah Cohen emicarong Richard-Mallins richard COPY EDITOR Jeanne Davis ART DIRECTOR Wendy Charron STAFF Britton Clapp Dawn Fallika Jason Ground Ben esser Ted Peterson Noemi Karneez Aaren Springer Neil Warner Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer Assisted Reporting, 38 Nelf Hall Annex Columbia, MO 65211 (573) 882-0684. Subscriptions.ru $40 for IRE meintiers, $60 for nonmembers Postmaster Please send address changes to NICAR Send email to:jpanine@rican.org NICAR is ajoint effort-of Investigative Reparters Editors and the University of Missonri School of Journalism NICAR services:include hands- newsroom training in computer= assisted.reporting special academic and advanced rating in data analysis NICAR supporred by OTATIES from The Freedom Forum and other foundations intended to help the institute deliver-its services nationwide to news organizations and associations 

From page one: 

Dusty evidence 

resentatives have fiercely denied our charges but have not explained why so many tests in the dustiest areas of mines have impossibly small amounts of dust in them - proof that the tests aren't being conducted properly. Nor have they explained why one-third of all underground mines annually flunk at least one dust test or why two-thirds of all mines 

The computer and on- the-ground reporting set up a dialogue. As we learned something in the field, we'd figure out new questions to ask the data. The data would in turn focus our field research. 

are cited each year for improper dust con- trols. All of these conclusions came from the computer work. 

I suppose we could have written some- thing without all of the computer analysis, but I don't know what it would have amounted to. The computer and on-the- ground reporting set up a dialogue. As we learned something in the field, we'd figure out new questions to ask the data. The data would in turn focus our field research. 

I did most of my analysis on a PC-com- patible Quantex, a monster when I bought it four years ago. I'd trade it now for a nice winter coat. My database program was Para- dox, which I learned by reading the manuals. When I'd get stuck, I'd call Borland's help line - a 900 number that initially caused some concern when it appeared on the bureau's phone bill. 

Helpful delays 

Eastern Kentucky's mines are almost en- tirely non-union and small operations. Fig- uring out how to get in touch with hundreds of miners was my first challenge. The state has at least two lists of miners; in May 1996 I asked for both. I received the first database 

in December, and several months passed before the second arrived. Since I couldn't start the project until receiving at least one of these crucial databases, the delay drove me nuts. 

Authorities offered every excuse imag- inable for their repeated delays. A special session of the Kentucky legislature was called in November in which the governor successfully pushed for legislation that dra- matically reduced miners' black-lung ben- efits. I got the data only after the legisla- tion passed. 

In retrospect, the delay might helped. Had we acquired the miner databases imme- diarely, we probably would have tried to publish before the special legislative session- which would have meant having only a few months to churn out a far weaker story. Then again, we might have affected that legisla- tion. Now we must wait until the 2000 session before legislators put our findings into bills. 

Slow-moving shoe leather 

My first idea was to send surveys to miners throughout Kentucky asking them about dust in the mines and the accuracy of feder- ally mandated dust tests. A survey expert at The Courier-Journal,, however, convinced me the idea was a bad one because of literacy and confidentiality worries, so we ditched it. (The bureau won't need any more letterhead until, oh, 2050.) 

I started calling miners. I visited anyone who agreed to talk, though not for long. Appalachia has famously poor roads, and many mining areas are remote. After a couple of weeks, I had spoken to less than a dozen miners. Since I had planned to talk to hun- dreds but had initially only been given five months to finish, something had to give. I decided to visit miners only when their tales were extraordinary. I interviewed the rest by phone. 

Even this took too long. First, miners are difficult to reach. Most work long and odd hours. Second, most declined to talk when I told them that I was doing a story on coal dust. I'd guess that I had to call 10 to 15 miners before I reached one willing to talk. 

Continued on page three 

2


Miner malaise 

From page two: 

FOIA water torture 

The next ser of data that I requested - simply out of curiosity- was dust-test records from the federal government. Somewhere along the line, I learned that a study of these records from the early 1980s had shown that many mines had suspiciously low results. I 

Nor have (industry representatives) explained why one-third of all underground mines annually flunk at least one dust test or why two- thirds of all mines are cited each year for improper dust controls. 

didn't expect much from these records "Who would be stupid enough to send obvi- ously fraudulent records to the federal gov- ernment?" I thought - so I asked only for a few years' worth. This was a mistake that I repeated again and again. 

After playing around with the most recent data, I realized that the graph looked very odd. Instead of a natural bell curve, it looked like a ski jump - all of the readings were bunched near zero, the lowest reading being the most common. And the percentage of low readings had increased in recent years. I talked to experts who said the shape must be the result of fraud 

I asked for a few more years of data. The trend continued. So I asked for more years. Then I asked for databases that would tell me which mines were sending in which records. I had initially limited my requests because I didn't want to overwhelm regulators - or myself, actually. But my water-torture FOIA method became a real annoyance to regula- tors, caused long delays and led me to miss early deadlines. 

My editor also pressed for information about the fines imposed by federal regulators for excessive dust levels. I asked for the gen- eral numbers from the agency press officers 

and FOIAed specific citations for the mines that we planned to name. 

I had avoided asking for the citation data- bases because I had been told that they were monstrous and would be enormously expen- sive. We finally swallowed hard and asked for them anyway. Ourin-house data gurus trans- ferred the information from mainframe tape to PC. Deadlinesloomed-ifl'dasked for the databases sooner, we could have gotten a lot more out of them. 

I had to split up these last, large databases so searches wouldn't take 15 minutes. I parsed many fields or transformed them to relate to other aspects of the data - all of which took several 900-line calls to the data massage parlor. 

Unlocking databases 

In great contrast to the state data, the federal data were relatively clean, but the structure had undergone several changes over the years. Figuring out and relating these structures took a lot of time, as did figuring out the data subsets we would use to answer specific questions. As the months passed, we grew increasingly conservative in our choice of numbers. Since we wanted to show that these very low readings must be the result of fraud, we excluded tests taken in all but the dustiest areas of mines. With more than a dozen kinds of data- bases, keeping track of the keys-the informa- tion that deciphers each field in each database - became one of the biggest headaches. 

Industry attacks 

All of this work paid off, however, when the coal industry began to attack our se- ries. The Kentucky Coal Association hired a consultant to analyze a few years of dust- test records and to find flaws in our meth- ods. None of his criticisms hit the mark. In fact, his analysis - since he had been far less generous than we were in excluding records from all but the dustiest areas - made the industry look even worse than we had portrayed it. Industry representatives no longer refer to the consultant's work when criticizing our series. 

LOOK FOR PETER EISLER'S ARTICLE ON THE 

DRINKING WATER'S HIDDEN DANGERS" SERIES PUBLISHED IN USA TODAY IN: THE MARCH 1999 ISSUE OF UPLINK. 

ALSO CHECK OUT THE OCTOBER 1998 ISSUE OF UPUNK FOR OTHER EVIDENCE OF COMPUTER ASSISTED REPORTING ON THE ENVIRONMENTAL BEAT, WITH STORIES BY KEN WARD OF THE CHARLESTON (W.V.). GAZETTE PENNY LOEB O U.S. NEWS & WORED REPORT, MIKE LEE OF THE RI-CITY HERALD KATIE SCHALLERS OF THE COMMERCIAL NEWS IN DANVILLE, IEL MARY MANNING AND STEVE KANIGHER OF THE LAS VEGAS SUN TOM HENRY OF THE (TOLEDC) BLADE AND RUSSELL CLEMINGS OF THE FRESNO BEE 

ALSO VISIT WWW.1RE.ORG STORE/BOOKSIIERHTMLI FOR INFORMATION ON MARY 

LANDERS' HANDBOOK INVESTIGATIVE 

Gardiner Harris can be reached by e-mail at gharris@mis.net 

ENVIRONMENTAL REPORTING 

3


OMAHA CRIME 

Simplifying incidents 

You CAN VIEW OMANA CRIME AT Hripil WWW.OMAHA.COM/OWHI CRIMEREPORT/ OBTAIN A HARD-COPY FREE OF CHARGE BY WRITING TO: OMAHA CRIME REPORT NEWSROOM OMAHA WORLD HERAED WORLD HERALD SQUARE, OMAHA NE 68102 OR CALE (402) 1000 AND ASK FOR NEWSROOM RECEPTION: 

By Carol Napolitano Omaha World-Herald 

When "Omaha Crime" rolled off the presses in November, I though to myself, "Is this all there is?" 

The 12-page section about reported crime from 1990 to 1997 looked pretty simple. Good stories and photos, decent maps (de- spite our old presses), lots of information. 

I realized that the simplicity itself was the great achievement of the project. We had produced a readable, balanced, fair and informative section about crime from nearly 13 million convoluted mainframe records. 

To me, there was nothing extraordinary. We could not boast about doing complex statistical analyses or unearthing some gov- ernment secret. There was no place where it could be seen plainly why this project took 17 months of my life. Then, I realized that the simplicity itself was the great achieve- ment of the project. We had produced a readable, balanced, fair and informative sec- tion about crime from nearly 13 million convoluted mainframe records. 

Manyjournalistscanidentify with thestory of how "Omaha Crime" came into being. Most likely it isn't 13 million records you are after, but the number doesn't treally matter. It's the process-the often confounding process of trying to obtain data from a reluctant govern- ment agency and, if you get it, the incredible amount of time it can take to clean that data and determine if it is reliable. 

"Omaha Crime" is a poster child for computer-assisted reporting. During the life of the project, we used Excel, Access, Visual FoxPro, SPSS and ArcView. We also de- signed a poll to assess how safe residents felt in Omaha 

First steps 

The journey began in January 1991 with written requests for electronic crime data from the police and sheriff. The newspaper, having limited CAR knowledge at that time, found itself unable to respond effectively to the government technobabble it got in re- sponse to those requests. So, the issue landed on the sidelines, arising only sporadically during the next five years. 

In early 1996, with a more extensive un- derstanding of CAR, we tried again. At our first negotiating session, we faced a roomful of lawyers and law enforcement officials who did not want the data in our hands. 

Neither the police nor the sheriff had ever used the data they collected. They had an antiquated mainframe system that allowed for little more than counting incidents for the FBI's Uniform Crime Report. As one police crime analyst put it: "We come armed every month with a handful of pencils. 

The last thing government officials wanted was a newspaper analyzing what they should have been analyzing themselves. So, at our final negotiating session in August 1996, the police department demanded a "handling fee" of $1.00 per record in addition to other data costs. 

They figured we'd go away. Instead, we sued. 

Two months later, they agreed to give us the data - reported incidents, bookings, ar- rest warrants, criminal histories and full per- sonal information on perpetrators and vic- tims. 

Reliability check 

The first installment of data arrived in June 1997. That's when crime numbers first consumed my life. More arrived through- out the year. 

Here are some of the things we did to help make sure the data was as reliable as possible: 

We excluded from our study places that had their own security OI police forces, such as universities. 

Incidents with "unfounded" status codes were removed. 
Violent incidents reported as having happened at police or sheriff offices, hospitals and extended-hour medical care centers, and 

Continued on page seventeen 

4


FROM THE INCIDENT TO THE RATE 

Mapping crimes 

By Naomi Aoki and Toni Whitt 

The Virginian-Pilot Like moths to a flame, peopleare drawn to news about crime. They want to know where, how and why it happened. But, most of all, they want to know if it could happen to them in their neighborhoods. There is no way to answer that question, but mapping crimes can help readers determine their risk. 

Crime-rate maps are great for comparing the relative safety of different states, cities or neighborhoods. Maps plotting specific incidents are valuable for tracking crime in small towns, a burglary ring or a serial rapist operating in a certain area. 

Crime maps fall into two caregories: the- matic maps showing crime rates or maps plotting specific incidents. Crime-rate maps are great for comparing the relative safety of differentstates, cities or neighborhoods. Maps plotting specific incidents are valuable for tracking crime in small towns, a burglary ring or a serial rapist operating in a certain area. 

Regardless of how you decide to map crimes, the first step is to get the incident report data from police. You need to know where the crime happened. For a crime-rate map, the 'where' needs to be a census tract, planning district, neighborhood or any other area for which you have population data. To plot individual crimes, you need an exact address or, failing that, a block number and street name. 

Depicting crime rates 

At The Virginian-Pilot, we publish crime- rate maps showing the previous year's prop- erty and violent crime rates for four cities in our region. Depending on the city, the maps are broken down into census tracts, police zones or city planning districts. 

Mapping the crime rates, rather than the individual incidents or number of crimes, allows readers to evaluate the safety of neigh- borhoods throughout the city. Readers like Prospective home owners often call asking for the maps; close to 15,000 people visit the online version each month. 

Step-by-step 

Get police incident data in an electronic format, including the incident number (or other unique identifier), offense, date, time, address or block number, census tract or other area for which you have population data, and anything else you can get. 
Calculate crime rates for the census tract or designated areas, using a database manager like Access or FoxPro. (For a crime rate per 1,000 residents, divide the number of crimes in an area by the population and multiply that number by 1,000.) 
Create the necessary census tract or area files for your mapping program. Most pro- grams come with census tract files, and most city planning departments can provide files for other district designations the cities use. 
Then, using the mapping program, map the crime rates you've calculated. 

Plotting crimes 

Plotting individual crimes can be a great tool for spotting patterns in crimes, but it is not a fair way of comparing crimes in differ- ent areas of the city. Areas that are densely populated and heavily trafficked are going to have more crimes. But if you notice a rash of rapes occurring in one geographical area, mapping will help you see any patterns. For example, in Virginia Beach, the state's largest city and popular resort area, several women living near the ocean reported being raped by a man who had broken into their homes. They gave similar descriptions of the suspect. Plotting those incidents on a map would have shown that the rapes all took place at the north end of the beach. That information alerted readers to be more cautious, to keep their windows and doors locked. Maps plotting incidents can also be useful for readers in small towns with fewer crimes. In larger cities, the sheer number of crimes Continued on page seventeen 

OTHER EXAMPLES GE WEB SITES DEVOTED TO CRIME STATISTICS AND MAPPING INCLUDE: 
THE CHARLOTTE OBSERVER AT HTTP: CHARL OF TECOMA 
CRIME 
THE EXANSVILLE COURIER AT HTTP:/ COURIER: EVANSVILLE CRIME 
REPORT TING SEE-THE SEPTEMBER 1998 ISSUE OF UPLINK BITHSTORIES BY ENNIFER LAFLEUR OF THE SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS NEILL BOROWSKI OF THE PHILADELPHIA INQUIRER IEFF PORTER OF THE ARKANSAS DEMOERAT- GAZEITE AND JAMES DERK 
OF THE EVANSVILLE COURIER 
FOR MORE ON MAPPING AND COMPUTER ASSISTED 

5


Build-your-own tables 

From page one: 

Disclosure, the company owned by Raymond and Kent Cooper, who both worked for the Federal Elections Commission and the Center for Responsive Politics. They built a database of contributions in Maryland races from 1994 to 1998. Last summer, Tom Brown at The Seattle Times combined federal and state campaign contributions into one database to determine 

"If you don't set it up right the first time, you have to do the whole thing again.' - Tony Raymond, Public Disclosure 

Washington's Top 50 political contributors. The project, which they did in-house, took about two months to complete. 

In both cases, some of the data were already in electronic format, eliminating the time- consuming and often costly effort of data entry. Both databases also identified the occu- pations and employees of as many major do- nors as possible. 

The most tedious tasks were standardizing contributor names and coding contributors for occupation and industry. (There is no effort by federal or state election commissions to address the problem of contributor names being listed several different ways, even though the money is coming from the same person.) In both projects, to complete the coding, both the reporter and the consultants were forced to call individual contributors to verify or determine their occupation. 

Project proposais 

When Raymond and Cooper first start talking with a newspaper about a project, they set up a division of labor from the beginning to define who will do what. Basic questions they initially want answered include: 

What level of donations do you want? Do you want donations to federal candidates as well as state legislators and county commis- sioners? 

Is the information available electronically? What's the average number of transactions for each level: federal, state or local? 
If the data are only available on paper, do you want to contract out with a data-entry firm to have in key-punched? Or does a state or local entity already key-punch the data into an in- house database, which you could request through the Freedom of Information Act? 
Do you want to code the contributions for occupation and employer by giving them an industry or sector classification? 

Both of Poole's projects required taentry. Poole used Quality Data Systems, a nation- wide data entry firm. Reporters can also find numerous data entry services near state capitols where state agencies require their work. 

When hiring a data entry firm, Poole sug- gests asking the firm's customers about the firm's accuracy rating. The contracts are usu- ally based on a per-record basis. It's best to receive bids for the contract from two or three vendors, Poole says. Then ask a price for a specific number of records and an expected turnaround time. 

When doing data entry, key in twice the contributor's name, donation amount and ZIP code (to help later with verification). Also add fields for the page number on which the contri- bution is listed and the schedule of the contri- bution form. These extra fields make it easier to spot poor data entry and to cross-verify sum- mary contribution information. "I think it's overkill to fully verify (key in twice) every single field for cost and for time reasons," Poole says. 

The newspaper needs to come up with clear rules for the data entry workers to follow, particularly when entering addresses. The da- tabase coordinator also needs to work closely with reporters who have covered campaign finance issues using paper records. In Poole's Virginia project, the summary contribution pages didn't have standardized date ranges A query of the iremized data told the actual date range. 

"On the summaries, it helps to know what they say and what they actually mean, which can often be two different things," Poole says. 

Occupation coding 

Occupation coding can be the most com- plicated, tedious and subjective process of build- Continued on page seven 

THE WEB:SITE FOR THE 

CAMPAIGN FINANCE

INFORMATION CENTER

CAMPAIGNFINANCE

ORG) is VALUABLE

RESOURCE FOR ANYONE

INYESTIGATING STATE

LEVEL CAMPAIGN

FINANCES (SEE PAGES 18

19 FOR AN EXTENSIVE

EXPLANATION. THE SHE

INCLUDES:

DOWNLOADABEE

ATABASES OF

CONTERIBETION DATA AND

LINKS TO SEARCH ENGINES

MAINTAINED BM NON-

PROFIT ORGANIZATIONS

AND STATE BOARDS OF

ELECTION

STORIES FROM PRIOR

ISSUES OF TRACKER

STORIES EXPLORING

CAMPAIGN FINANCE AJI

THE LOCAL STATE AND

FEDERAL LEVELS

INFORMAHON ON THE

CFIC-E MAILING LIST

TIPSHEETS ON COVERING

CAMPAIGN FINANCE

LINKS to POTENTIAL

SOURCES FOR CAMPAIGN

FINANCE STORIES AND

OTHER REI EVANT SETES


6


From page six: 

Coding questions 

ing a database, but also the most enlighten- ing. 

"Some of the best stories that have been done are those where classification has been done," Raymond says. "You can see trends and patterns, such as how much gambling has influenced a particular area." 

The Post's project tried to identify employer and occupation for every donor who gave $1,000 or more. To make the matches, they ran names against other databases, looked up names in newspaper archives, and phoned several people just to ask who they were and what they did for a living. Public Disclosure did most of the work, identifying 78 percent of major donors to the governor's race. 

But it's important to point out the caveats of occupation coding to editors and readers. Raymond uses the example of General Elec- tric, which also owns a television network, makes commercial and defense jet engines, and constructs refrigerator parts. 

"So what do you code GE as?" Raymond asks. "Is it a defense contractor, a home appli- ance company or jet crafter?" 

When dealing with large companies, re- porters need to be aware of the large players involved. When Raymond's company works with newspapers to code contributions, many coding decisions are left to the newspaper and reporters themselves, who are more familiar with area industries. 

In the Seattle series, the reporrers consid- ered a couple as one entity when both were significant donors. They also included corpo- rate contributions of companies known to be controlled by one individual. Brown warns that reporters looking at contributions over a long period must beware of contributors who have died. Four of their original Top 50 had died during the seven years of contributions the newspaper considered. 

Structuring the database 

Raymond suggests having a master table that lists details on all contributors. This serves as a look-up table for all the names. Raymond builds databases using Microsoft Access. Each contributor name is given a unique identifier. Then each office or race-such as the guberna- torial or state legislative races-becomes itsown separate table. 

"You're going to get information in the 

gubernatorial race that will be different than the legislature," he says. "But you want to keep all that information The most flexible thing you have going is that master table. It's really the key to it." With this structure, every time a media outlet wants to add another level of campaign contributions, they don't have to change the database just add a related table for that office and add the contributor names to the master table. The database structures for the New York and Virginia projects differ. In the Virginia database, every contributor and candidate has a unique identifying number in a relational database with 10 tables that relate to the main contributions table. They also code contribu- tors for occupations. In New York, for competitive reasons within the consortium, the database only assigns a unique number to candidates. Each newspaper then decides whether they want to standardize names or code for occupation. "The papers there have a much higher level of distrust," Poole says. "They were all happy to have the base data, and each of them just wanted to take it from there." 

Verifying the data 

Raymond reminds reporters that the data- base is only as good as the data you obtain. The reporter has to be able to verify the database information. "The data you're going to get needs to be scrubbed up so it's garbage in and garbage out," Raymond says. In Seattle, reporters ran an explanatory note with the tables pointing out potential problems with the data. The note mentioned data-entry error by public agencies and that paper records were examined selectively. The note also stated that the contribution totals reported were mostly like the minimum anyone actually gave. 

FINANCE" BY DAVID 

Making the data available 

After the darabase is built, it' important to get the information to key people in the newsroom and make sure they understand how to use is otherwise you render the system worthless. Raymond's company sets up the database on an Intranet in which reporters use their Web browser to query the database and sort the data 

CONTACT THE IRE RESOURCE CENTER AT 

(573) 882-3364 OR VISIT www. IRE ORG! 

Continued on page seventeen 

RESOURCECENTER FOR INFORMATION: ONE OTHER HANDOUTS AND TIPSHEETS 

CONCERNING CAMPAIGN FINANCE ALSO SEARCH 

OTHER HANDOUTS INCLUDE: 

UPDATED CFIC WEB SITE AT WWW.CAMPAIGNFINANGE 

FOR TIPSHEETS ON THE 

VETTING DONORS BY PHIL KUNTZ OF THE WALL STREET JOURNAL # 710) 

ORGISTORIES HIME 

Tips AND SOURGES,FOR FIGURING OUT WHO 

DONORS ARE (AND WHETHER YOU SHOULD CARE) WHEN ALL YOU HAVE IS A NAME AND POSSIBLE AN-ADDRESS 

POOLE (#795) "TIPS FOR CREATING CAMPAIGN DATABASES FROM PAPER RECORDS 

COVERING STATE AND LOCAL CAMPAIGN 

DIANE RENZULEI OF THE CENTER FOR PUBLIC INTEGRITY (#813) 

7 

PRICING DOGFIGHT 

Let the buyer know fares 

DAVID SMALLEN PROJECT 

MANAGER FOR AVIATION 

COMPETITION AND ACCESS 

ISSUES IN THE DOT'S 

PUBLIC AEFAIRS OFFICE 

By Bob Warner Philadelphia Daily News How do airline fares from your city stack up against airfares from other cities? In Phila- delphia, a hub for US Airways, we've always had the sense that our fares were on the high side. Planning a trip to the West Coast or overseas, you can usually save serious money 

YASHERFFUL EXPLAINING 

VARIOUS ASPECTS OF THE 

EDATATANDTHE 

DEVELOPING POLITICAL 

DEBATE OVERAIRLINE 

COMPETTHIONE PHONE 

NUMBER IS (202) 366 

55683 

We've long been irked that it costs more to fly from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh, another US Airways hub, than to catch a flight all the way to Florida. 

by traveling up to Newark, N.J., or down to Baltimore. We've long been irked that it costs more to fly from Philadelphia to Pittsburgh, another US Airways hub, than to catch a flight all the way to Florida. 

But how do you document the cost of air travel from Philadelphia or compare it to other cities? We never figured out a way until we noticed a brief item in The New York Times travel section, mentioning a Web site on airline fares, set up by the U.S. Transpor- tation Department at http://ostpoweb.dot.gov/ aviation/domfares/domfares.htm 

With just a few hours' work after down- loading several files and working them into Access and Excel, we calculated average fares per mile on the busiest air routes from Phila- delphia and compared them to fare levels (known in the airline industry as "yields") on the busiest routes from other cities. 

In our opinion, the results were newswor- thy: average fares from Philadeiphia in the period we looked at (the first quarter of 1998) were 24.2 cents a mile - third highest among the nation's 30 busiest air destinations, just behind Minneapolis (a Northwest Airlines hub, 25.5 cents a mile) and Dallas (an Ameri- can Airlines hub, 24.8 cents a mile). 

Preserving competition 

The Transportation Department has as- 

sembled this data as part of a federal effort to deal with anti-competitive practices in the airline industry. The original source of the data is the airlines themselves, which are required to submit voluminous data every quarter that list the origin, destination, ticket price and more on 10 percent of all tickets they sell. The data is known inside the de- partment as the "10 percent O & D" (for origin and destination). 

What's posted on the Web is not the origi- nal data but tables derived from it, covering more than 1,100 of the busiest domestic air routes. For us, the most valuable table was the first one, which described each of 1,179 routes with the following information: origin and destination cities; the mileage between those cities; the average number of passengers each day; the average fare; the carrier with the largest market share and its average fare and market share; and the carrier offering the lowest aver- age fare and its market share, 

Other tables describe average fares from each city, changes in fare levels between 1997 and 1998, and more detailed information on specific airlines and market shares on specific routes. 

Wobbly tables 

The data goes back to the beginning of 1997 and is updated quarterly. There are several pitfalls. 

First, the tables available on the Web do not differentiate between multiple airports in a single metropolitan area. For flights begin- ning or ending in Chicago, for example, there's no way to separate fares from Hare and Midway. For New York City, the prob- lem is more difficult: flights using Newark Airport, where several low-cost carriers opei- ate, are lumped together with flights from JFK and LaGuardia. Reporters in New York City would have to go to the original O & D data to deal with this problem. 

Second, the federal data relies on calcula- tions of an "average" fare for each city-to-city route. As airlines are quick to point out, in the real-life airline industry there's no such thing as an "average" fare. On most major routes, the airlines start with a three-tiered rate structure: first-class, short-notice "business" fares and lower-cost "leisure" fares requiring ticket pur- 

Continued on page nine 

From page eight: Adjusting averages 

chases weeks in advance. But on top of that structure, each major airline has developed ways to modify its fare offerings around the clock - to deal with competitive pressures from other airlines and to confront the real-earnings specter of large blocks of empty, unsold seats. US Airways told us that the federal study 

The federal data relies on calculations of an "average" fare for each city-to-city route. As airlines are quick to point out, in the real-life airline industry there's no such thing as an "average" fare. 

is seriously flawed because it fails to account for variances between business travel and leisure travel from different airports. We quoted the airline to this effect, but they 

didn't convince us to drop the story. In Philadelphia, we do have a relatively high proportion of business travel. But there is sufficient anecdotal evidence to suggest that this proportion is an effect - not a cause - of high local fares. Many leisure travelers, those paying for their own tickets, are traveling to other airports to save money, raising the business-to-leisure travel ratio further. 

Third, working with the data, you have to be careful to avoid "averaging averages." If you' re dealing with 40 different routes involv- ing your local airport, you can't just add up the 40 "average" fares, add up the 40 distances, and divide to get an average fare per mile. You have to make adjustments based on how many passengers used each route. Fortunately, the posted federal data include the number of passengers traveling each route, enabling re- porters to simply multiply to find figures for total passenger miles and total fares. (We made this mistake, though it's easy to avoid, in our first pass at the data.) 

Bob Warner can be reached by phone at (215) 854-5885 or by e-mail at bwarner@philly.infi.net 



Los Angeles	New York	2469	6111	$357	American (33.34)	$437	Tower Air (10.49)	$155
Boston	New York	185	5971	$132	Delta (42.59)	$126	Delta (42.59)	$126
Chicago	New York	726	5850	$255	United (38.47)	$282	Continental (12.45)	$185
Dallas	Houston	236	5631	$73	Southwest (67.82)	$74	American (18.65)	$66
Miami	New York	1093	5076	$164	American (48.62)	$184	Tower Air (13.13)	$98
New York	Washington	214	5076	$136	Delta (46.24)	$125	Delta (46.24)	$125
New York	Orlando	945	4989	$141	Delta (45.02)	$142	UUS Airways (11.54)	$137
New York	West Palm Beach	1024	4860	$154	Continental (30.36	$163	TWA (19.88)	$128
Atlanta	New York	255	4842	$188	Delta (54.11)	$223	AirTran Airways (10.23)	$118
Ft. Lauderdale	New York	1074	4577	$156	Delta (31.13)	$151	US Airways (11.94	$144



OTHER PAPERS THAT HAVE WORKED WITH THE-DATA INCLUDE THE CHARLOTTE OBSERVER CINGINNATE ENQUIRER, DAYTON DAILY NEWS, GREENSBORO NEWS RECORD, MEMPHIS COMMERCIAL APPEAL PITTSBURGH POST-GAZETE ROCHESTER DEMOCRAT AND 

CHRONICLE AND THE WASHINGTON POST 

9


SCHOOL VAN SAFETY QUESTIONS 

Dealing wheels 

ABC STORY 
AVAILABLE N.THE IRE 
RESOURCE CENTER OR 
AT DATELINE NBC's WE SITE: 
WWW MSNBE COM 
DATELINE JUST GO TO ARCHIVES AND VIEWTHE 
PIECE TESSED SCHOOL 
VANS: ARE THEY AS SAFE BUSES! 

By Andy Lehren Dateline NBC 

Producer Shachar Bar-On came into my office wanting to know whether we could use computerized records to show a federal agency was not enforcing school bus safety laws. We could, and it's a story that could be done by many local and regional news organizations around the country. 

A little-known federal law forbids car deal- ers from selling vans to schools. Schools save money by buying vans, which cost less to operate than traditional, small-sized yellow school buses. But experts say vans are far less safe for transporting students - mainly be- cause of inferior structural protection and interior padding. Manufacturers do include warning letters in these vans that clearly state "not a school bus." 

The safety question is not hypothetical. In July 1994, a truck rammed into a school van in South Carolina, killing 6-year-old Jacob Strebler. Yet 18 months earlier, in an almost identical accident in the same part of town, a truck had slammed into a small-sized school bus - and none of the children was seriously hurt. Dateline found Strebler was one of at least a dozen children who died in vans they were never supposed to be in. According to experts, they most likely would have survived if they had been in school buses. 

The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration is supposed to check whether vans are being sold to schools. The law is a little unusual: it is illegal for dealers to sell the vans to schools but not illegal for schools to own them. Since the 1974 law took effect. NHTSA has taken 10 enforcement actions against dealers for selling vans to schools. NHTSA said it only has so much staff to handle all its duties. 

But by using vehicle databases, Dateline showed how easily the agency could be check- ing on vans sold to schools for transporting students. We picked a state. Texas - and obtained its database for motor vehicles. We looked at vehicles owned by schools and then analyzed the data to find which schools owned vans for transporting students. We found hundreds. The point was not only to show that vans were being sold to schools but also to prove that it was not hard to enforce the law. It helped us question NHTSA about 

how it was not taking simple steps to prevent the deals from happening. 

Record roadblocks 

The school van safety story is one that many news organizations across the country could do for their own communities. Bar-On and Dareline correspondent Bob McKeown 

(The VIN) describes the vehicle, including any seating arrangement, and can be decoded We separated vans for hauling maintenance equipment from those for transporting students. 

did terrific reporting. We encountered a few difficulties. For example, we examined hun- dreds of thousands of computerized accident reports in the U.S. Department of Transportation's Fatal Accident Reporting System. These records were not perfect. In a few instances, vans were incorrectly marked as being used by schools. More often, vans were not properly identified as being used by schools. 

To help determine which vans are used to transport children, we paid particular atten- tion to vehicle identification numbers - an automobile's equivalent of a Social Security number. It is not a random set of numbers and letters. It describes the vehicle, including any seating arrangement, and can be decoded with easily obtainable reference books or databases. By doing this, we separated vans for hauling maintenance equipment from those for transporting students. 

This is also an example of a story that may not be possible in certain states, depending on privacy laws and rules on electronic access to data. While many states provide access to vehicle ownership records, this is not true everywhere-another reminder that journalists need strong open-records laws to do their job. Andy Lehren can be reached by e-mail at alehren@nbc.com 

10


FIRST VENTURES 

Neighborhood rap sheet 

By Pete Basofin 

The Sacramento Bee 

The idea to examine crime patterns in Sacramento came from the city police Web site, where citizens can examine rrentneigh- borhood crime statistics. Initially, Bee re- porter Nancy Weaver Teichert and I thought we would gather older data to support a story about neighborhood crime trends. We also wanted to rank neighborhoods in terms of crime patterns. 

But it quickly became apparent that Sac- ramento neighborhoods could not be com- pared with any accuracy. Besides the great variation in size and population, the bound- aries of the geographic areas employed in police crime reporting did not fit exactly with accepted neighborhood boundaries. While per capita comparisons might have worked, we did not have easy access to population figures for such segments of the city. 

Fortunately, the reported crime data could be analyzed for a smaller, more uniform geographic parcel. The police subdistrict is an administrative unit less than a square mile in size. Although the population density does vary, we felt comparisons and sorting were valid for these 520 subdivisions. By ranking subdistricts, we could identify specific trouble spots in the city. 

Terminology translation 

Police provided the Bee with annual data (1991-1997) in seven files. To simplify the process of creating crime categories, we fol- lowed police practice in translating Califor- nia penal code numbers into common termi- nology - homicide, kidnapping, auto theft, etc. Forsummary purposes, we then grouped these crime categories into broader crime types - property crime, violent crime and weapons/narcotics. We used the latter to rank police subdistricts and display historical data for each area. 

Police estimated a 10 percent error in the reported crime staristics. Since the material originated from busy cops on the bear, errors did creep into the complex reporting form. Officers must make quick, complicated judge- ments about the exact nature of the crime and its assignment to a penal code number. 

Close examination of the data revealed occasional inaccuracy in the identification of 

police subdistrict numbers. In general, it was important to discuss the accuracy of field information with the police. For example, we were told that the tagging of gang-related crimes should not be used because it was done SO erratically. 

Subdistrict statistics 

The project published in the newspa- per was inspired - but not dominated - by statistics. Reporters used the data to iden- tify parts of the city that suffered from high crime or enjoyed low crime. Then they went into the community to speak with many sources, including police, crime victims, shopkeepers, homeowners, apart- ment residents, commuters, and neigh- borhood activists. These interviews breathed life into the series. 

The series uncovered particular condi- tions fostering various types of crime. Neigh- borhood profiles identified specific problem spots, such as malls, bus stations, and conve- nience stories, which attract criminals. A commonly held belief about the relative high crime in one inner-city neighborhood was dispelled by the data presented. 

Pete Basofin can be reached by e-mail at pbasofin@sacbee.com. 

Because of heavy emphasis on police sub- districts, the project featured large maps lo- cating the regions of high property and vio- lent crime. It was clear at the onset that we couldn't display locator maps and statistics for all 520 subdistricts. So we turned to the Bee's Web site to create a permanent database with which readers can call up historical data on the area immediately surrounding their home or business. 

The biggest challenge in displaying data on the Web was helping users find their police subdistricts. News artist Mitchell Brooks gave the Bee's New Media depart- ment a highly detailed map showing the streets bordering each parce!. These were divided into twelve smaller maps, which the user navigates through a clever "zoom-in. zoom-out" feature. Once the subdistrict of interest is found, the user simply enters the four-digit code into a box to get total num- bers of property, violent and weapons/nar- cotics crimes for the years 1991-97. 

UPCOMING BOOT CAMPS 

ADVANCED STATISTICS WORKSHOP MAY 10.13. 1999 CHAPEL HILL, NC IRE AND NICAR AND THE UNIVERSITY OF NORTH CAROLINA SCHOOL OF OURNALISM WILL HOST AN ADVANCED SEMINAR ON USING STATISTICS IN EOMPURERSASSISTED REPORTING INNSTRUCTORS WILE INCLUDE PHILIP MEYER AND SARAH COHEN: AN OP TIONAL SESSION ON THE BASICS OF THE STATISTICAL SOFTWARE SPSS WILL AKE PLACE ON SUNDAY MAY 9. (MOTHER'S 

DAY EDITOR BOOT CAMP MAY 13-15. 1999 

COLUMBIA: MO 

BASIC BOOT CAMP MAY 16-21-1999 

COLUMBIA, MO 

BASIC BOOT CAMP 

JULY -23. 099 

COLUMBIA, MO 

BASIC BOOT CAMP AUG. B- 3. 1999 

COLUMBIA, MO 

CALE (573) 882-2042 FOR 

MORE INEORMATION OR 

VISIT THE IRE WEB SITE A 

www IRE ORG/TRAINING 

11


HANDOUTS OF THE MONTH 

Planes, trains 

TD SEARCH THE 

COLLECTION OF 

CONFERENCE HANDOUTS 

AVAIEABLE FROM THE IRE 

RESOURCE CENTER 

DIRECT YOUR WEB 

BROWSERY TO WWW.REORG 

THE RESOURCE CENTERS CAN BE-REACHED AT 533 882-3364 ORB MAIL RESCNTR@IRE ORG 

RESOURCE CENTER'S WEB PAGES AT WWW.RE:ORGI RESOURCECENTER/ ARE 

LINKS TO RESOURCES FOR SPECIFICBEATS AND 

INF FORMATION ON BUYING 

AUDIO TAPES FROM 

CONFERENCE PANELS. 

The following excerpts from handouts con- cerning CAR on the transportation beat are all available in their entirety from the Resource Center. Request the number listed in parentheses. Call (573) 882-3364 for more information. 

Crash course (#816) By Justin Mayo The Seattle Times 

RESOURCECENTER 

THISSHEETSY HTML 

When things collide, one of the results is data, Generally, the destruction of property or human injury generates huge amounts of paperwork, which eventually ends up in a 

TO SEARCHTHELBRARD 

OF MORE THAN 12.000 

INVESTEGATHE STORIES 

AVAILABLE GO TO 

WWW.RR.ORG 

RESOURCECENTERE 

STORYDB HTML 

A good strategy is to first request paper records and the record layout of the database. That way you can see what's collected at the scene of the accident and what information is available in the database. 

ALSO INCLUDED ON THE 

database. This grim reality is good news for CAR reporters because of the abundance of accidents - and therefore accident data. Ad- ditionally, transportation safety is an issue that will always be important to the audience and one that can clearly be enhanced through computer-assisted reporting, 

Three things to keep in mind: First, although many databases are con- structed or disseminated at the federal level, remember that you can also tap local agencies - especially for automobile accidents. 

Most of the time the state will be more current and complete. However, local agen- cies might be reluctant to give out the entire database without redacting some informa- tion. So be prepared to know what you really need to get out of the database and be ready to fight for it. A good strategy is to first request paper records and the record layout of the database. That way you can see what's collected at the scene of the accident and what information is available in the darabase. 

If you're going to write about individual accidents, always ask for the paper records. 

Second, when trying to make compari- sons, you II need to normalize the data. Usu- ally, raw numbers will not be enough. Nor- malizing data will depend on the nature of your story. For example, if you re looking at fatality rates for the elderly, you' have to get statistics based on the number of miles driven by age of the driver. On the other hand, if you want to look at the type of vehicles involved in rollover accidents, the number of cars on the road by type would be necessary. 

Third, beware of online datasources. Many of the federal accident databases are available online, particularly aviation dara. These sites can be a great resource for deadline searches, but be warned that some are incomplete. It's best to get the entire dataset directly from the agency (or NICAR) if you plan to use a particular database on a regular basis. 

NOTE: In the remainder of his handout, Mayo discusses available utabases-organized under the topic headings of air, roads, rail and agencies, the Web and/or NICAR. 

justin Mayo can be reached by e-mail at jmayo@seattletimes.com 

Must-have resource (#677) By Heather Newman 

Detroit Free Press 

The Directory of Transportation Data Sources, published by the Bureau of Trans- portation Statistics (the Mecca of free trans- portation data), is the best collection of data- base descriptions anywhere. (And it's also free.) It includes a comprehensive listing of dara collected by dozens of federal agencies and who to call for information. It also gives you that crucial what-is-this-darn-database- called edge when filing your FOIAs. Call BTS at (202) 366-DATA or order from the Web site at http://www.bts.gov. 

Keep in mind that nearly everything col- lected federally comes from a local agency first - so updated and complete information might be just around the corner instead of in D.C. Cultivate your state police department for freeway accident dara, your city police department for pedestrian hit-and-runs, your county transportation department for road 

Continued on page thriteen 

12


From page twelve: and automobiles 

condition and traffic information, your state Department of Natural Resources for boat- ing or snowmobile accidents. 

Heather Newman can be reached by e-mail at newman@freepress.com 

Colliding databases (#816) By Elizabeth Marchak 

The Plain Dealer Aviation reporting is complicated and time-consuming. The computer makes it even more so. A few notes of caution: Don't 

Keep in mind that nearly everything collected federally comes from a local agency first - so updated and complete information might be just around the corner instead of in D.C. 

wait until deadline. Learn what offices the FAA, the NTSB and the IG have in your area. If they hang up, don't give up. The aviation community has a low opinion of reporters. You have to convince them you are serious. 

Develop sources you never quote. People you can double-check your findings with are more valuable than anybody who can give you a pithy quote on deadline. Secret sources are your reality check. 

Have a plane crash plan in place in your newsroom. Know how your community plans to respond. Develop contacts at the NTSB, which investigates plane crashes (not the FAA). Learn the schedule for the release of reports and opening of dockets. 

Know how to search for accidents and incident data. Know how to search for a whole fleet using the four-digit OP code, or operator code. (Computer data for one plane is rarely sufficient and is unfair to the opera- tor.) Know ATA or airplane system codes. Know how to search for N-numbers and serial numbers. (A tail number or an N- number may change, but a serial number 

shouldn't.) And learn the lingo, but keep it out of your stories. Learn to put repairs and problems in context. A rash of reports of lavatory and exit lights problems are far less serious than air returns for lack of radar. Remember, it's what isn't reported that is often the real problem. Don't use data on deadline you never seen before. There's a really good reason Web pages have disclaimers about completeness they really don' thave everything. Many news organizations have ignored these warnings and shoved data into the paper or on the air, making huge mistakes, missing important angles or ruining their credibility with poten- tial sources in the process. 

File FOIAs on every single aviation entity in your area. This is the best way to find out who has been inspected and when, who has been "violated" (FAA slang for who has been investigated for violating regulations), and what action the FAA took. File for every single significant event, too. There are FOIA officers out there who love a well-written request on something nobody else is paying attention to, so let er rip. 

Elizabeth Marchak can be reached by e-mail at marchak@digex.com 

Using aviation safety documents (#677) By Byron Acohido 

Know the landscape. Determining the probable cause of an aviation disaster is the responsibility of the NTSB, a small, quirky federal agency whose investigators pride them- selves on objectivity and scientific certainty. Yet the NTSB openly solicits technical ex- pertise from aircraft manufacturers, airlines, pilots and mechanics. You can bet each group possesses a strong self-protection bias. The NTSB's crash-site "go-team" usually includes engineers from the aircraft and en- gine manufacturers, who invariably take the lead in identifying and retrieving wreckage material. The manufacturers then use their own labs and technicians to analyze and test suspect parts. Pilots, mechanics and airline representatives are assigned to check mainte- 

The Seattle Times 

OTHER HANDOUTS ON TRANSPORTATION TOPICS INCLUDE: "HELL ON WHEELS: A FEW IDEAS FOR COVERING TRAFFIC SAFETY ISSUES USING STATE AND LOCAL DATA AVAILABLE IN MOST JURISDICTIONS" BY BOB WARNER, PHILADELPHIA DAILY NEWS (#776) "COLLIDING DATABASES: COVERING DISASTERS AND ACCIDENTS," AN EXHAUSTIVE LISTING OF WEB SITES COMPILED BY DAVID MILLIRON, THE ATLANTA JOURNAL CONSTITUTION (#816) AVIATION SITES ONLINE' AND How INVESTIGATED THE STORY: VALUjET AND THE FAA" BY ELIZABETH MARCHAK THE (CLEVELAND) PLAIN DEALER (#816) 'BEYOND THE COLLISION COURSE' RICK LINSK ASBURY PARK PRESS (#776) 

Continued on page fourteen 

13


Collisions with CAR 

THEFOLLOWING TRANSPORTATION DATABASES ARE TVAIL-ABLEFROM NICAR'S DATABASE LIBRARY SEE www IRE ORGIDATALIBRARY OR CALL (573) MORE DETAILED INFORMATION 

AIR 

FAA ENFORCEMENITS: 1967 1998 FAA SERVICE 

DIFFICULTY REPORTS 1974 1998 

FAA ACCIDENTS AND INCIDENTS, 1971-1998 AIRMEN DIRECFORYAND AIRCRAFT REGISTRY NASA AIR SAFETY REPORTING SYSTEM 1988 4997 

NTSB INVESTIGATIONS OF: AIRCRAFT ACCIDENTS E985-1997 

From page thirteen: 

nance records and research what role, if any, ground and flight crew missteps may have played in the accident. Commercial jets crash, on average, less than two times for every 1 million flights. Assuming the overall accident rate remains low for the foreseeable future, air travel should continue to expand about 5 per- cent annually. That means the total num- ber of crashes will continue to climb year 

Find the "discretionary" funds, who controls them, and what they're used for. Get the records on how the money has been spent (ask if they're in a computer database) and then compare them to the department's priorities. It's a sure bet the two lists won't match up. 

to year. Factor in aging aircraft issues and increasing competition among airlines, and a disturbing trend isn't hard to predict. In fact, many experts think the trend toward messy air disasters occurring weekly is al- ready well under way. 

The present approach of dealing with accidents by permitting the potentially cul- pable parties to sift through wreckage, nego- tiate a probable cause and then methodically take steps to make sure it doesn't happen again is under strain. It gives manufacturers and airlines, who are driven by economic concerns, the benefit of the doubt; and it skews against preventative measures taken in a timely fashion. Too often a long trail of problem flights, dead-end investigations and incremental upgrades - precursors of a disas- ter in the making - is ignored until a crash or crashes occur. Meanwhile the public is by and large left out of the loop. 

Transportation scams and bungling - some tips (#847) By Bill Krueger The News & Observer 

Byron Acohido can be reached by e-mail at bacchido@seattletimes.com 

Figure out who's getting access to the roads. Find the traffic engineers who are responsible for considering requests for curb cuts on major roads-requests from develop- ers and business owners - ask them if their recommendations have ever been overturned or ignored. 

Look for right-of-way scams. Most deals aren't worth spending your time on, but check with the Federal Highway Administra- tion on any right-of-way settlements they refused to sign. Chances are, there's some- thing funny about the deal if the Feds won't sign off. Ask to see the appraisais prepared for the department and compare those amounts to the amount actually paid. In fact, ask to see the entire project file. 

Find the slush funds. Talk to veteran transportation officials, politicians, and ad- vocacy groups to find the "discretionary" funds, who controls them, and what they're used for. Get the records on how the money has been spent (ask if they're in a computer database) and then compare them to the department's priorities. It's a sure bet the two lists won't match up. 

Take the bite out of the watchdog. When you find the slush funds, see if a lot of money is going to members of legislative oversight committees or other legislators with power over the transportation department. Ask for any correspondence or records of phone calls from those legislators. 

Are your roads being maintained? Most states have goals, or standards, for resurfacing their roads. Find out what those goals are; then find out how many miles the state is resurfacing each year; then do the math. Is your state meeting its own goals? If not, why not? Talk to the maintenance engineers out in the field - they can tell you where the problems are. 

Could that accident have been prevented? State transportation agencies spend a lot of money analyzing intersections and other potential danger spots on roads. If there is a bad accident on a road near you, check with the state's traffic safety engineers to see if 

Continued on page fifteen


14


From page fourteen: Headlights on slush 

they've studied that intersection. If they al- ready knew it was dangerous, why didn't they fix it? Had they spent the money on a project that was a lower priority but had more politi- cal muscle behind it? Again. ask to see the project file. 

"If it's good for bizness " Find out if your state has a fund for industrial access roads. Such roads often amount to little more then private driveways for companies - paid 

The present approach of dealing with accidents by permitting the potentially culpable parties to sift through wreckage, negotiate a probable cause and then methodically take steps to make sure it doesn't happen again is under strain. 

for by taxpayers. Check the files to find out who weighed in on the company's behalf and whether the department followed its own rules for paying for such roads. 

Bill Krueger can be reached by e-mail at bkrueger@nando.com 

Hidden hazards (#618) By Penny Loeb 

U.S. News & World Report TRAINS: 

Nearly once every hour, somewhere in the country, a train falls of the track, collides with another train or has some other sort of mis- hap. Often the accident is miles from no- where. Only occasionally does a fiery and fatal crash in a metropolitan area draw na- tional attention. 

Fortunately, there are lots of data to help reporters find out where accidents are occur- ring and which railroads have the worst records. The Federal Railroad Administra- tion has downloadable data files for the past 

six years on its Web site. These cover acci- dents by every railroad, employee injuries, and accidents at railroad crossings. The site also has text and tables from the annual report on safety. 

Caution: One accident can have multiple records - one for each railroad involved and one for the track owner. You must group by accident ID, date, time and the track owner when counting accidents. Double-check your results against the annual report. 

A rail-crossing accident is the most fre- quent cause of deaths. You can easily find how many accidents occurred in your area in the federal data. Then check out the safety features of the crossings. Many crossings are without gates. Watch drivers when they cross; sometimes they will ignore warning signals just to save a couple of seconds. 

Old and rickety track is the leading cause of train accidents. Find out which railroad has the most accidents caused by bad track and then figure out why. As railroads cut back workers, there just aren't enough to repair the broken track. Railroads, too, haul ore and other loads too heavy for some kinds of track. 

To increase profits, railroads are sending out cars with serious defects. These include broken wheels inoperative brakes, and bad shock-absorbing mechanisms. Ask for FRA inspections of the railroad you are covering. Talk to the workers who fix the trains. 

SUBWAYS: 

Want to know how many people were injured in your subway or metro? How many were robbed, and how that compares to big cities? Or how much it costs to run the system? 

The answers can all be found in great detail in data on the Web site of the Federal Transit Administration. There are data on accidents, crime, and costs. The data are in Lotus spreadsheets and cover 1993-96. The data also contain the miles traveled for each system. You can establish a rate of accidents per mile traveled to equalize results between systems of different sizes. 

Penny Loeb can be reached by e-mail at pioeb@usnews.com 

Continued on page sixteen 

NICAR TRANSPORTATION DATABASES, CONTINUED: 

RAIL 

RAILROAD ACCIDENTS. 1991 1996 

ROADS 

FRUCK ACCIDENT DATABASE 

DOT FATAL ACCIDENTS 

1975 1997 

NHTSA VEHICLE 

RECALLS AND COMPLAINTS 1966 1997 

WATERWAYS 

BOATING ACCIDENTS 1969 1996 UNITED STATES BOAT RECISTRATION 

GENERAL 

HAZARDOUS MATERIALS 97 1997 

15


OTHER SETES TO ONSIDER DATE INE NBC's "DANGEROUS ROAD'S INTERACTIVE DATABASE WWW.MSNBC COMIONAIR! NBCIDATELINEIROADSIDBASP How SAFE ARE THE ROADS YOU DRIVE EVERY DA ENTER YOUR ZIP CODE ON DATELINE S WEB SITE TO FIND OUT THE DATA COMES DIRECT FROM THE EARS DATABASE THE DeT. WEB-SERVER QUICKLOCATOR WEBMAP. HIMI: COMPLETE LISTING OF DOTSITES GOOD PLACE FO GO FISHING :WHEN YOUR TROLL ING FOR: PARTICULAR INEORMATIONE GAO REPORTS GAO GOY NOT ADATABASE BUFF IMPOSSIBLE TOBOVEREO THE GAO HAS DONE MORE STUDIES ON MORE TYPES OF TRANSPORTATION PROBLEMS THAN YOU CAN 

From page fifteen: Transportation sites 

SHAKE A STICK AT: 

The following Web sites were mentioned in various handouts discussing CARand the trans- portation beat. 

Air 

Airsafe Financial - http://airsafe.com This site lists airline safety information for the airline passenger and contains various aircraft accident data. Daily Airline Filings - http://airline info.com This site offers the full text of regulatory filings by airlines. Federal Aviation Administration Office of System Safety - http://nasdac.faa.gov 

The site will allow you to access aircraft accident data and a myriad of other data- bases, including the NTSB Aviation Acci- dent/Incident Database, the Aviation Safety Reporting System, the Near Midair Colli- sions System (NMACS) Database, NTSB Safety Recommendations to the FAA with FAA Responses, the International Safery Recommendations Database, and the Avia- tion Safety Statistical Handbook. 

This privately maintained site has the blessing of the FAA and the private blessings of dozens of reporters. Among the databases you'll find sophisticated searches of FAA regulations, Canadian regulations, AIM, the Pilot Controller Glossary, Service Difficulty Reports, Airworthiness Alerts, NTSB Briefs, N-Numbers and the FAA Airmen knowl- edge test information. 

Rail 

Federal Railroad Administration - www.fra.dot.gov 

The FRA site is your one-stop shop for railroad accident data. Who hit what and when and how, and sometimes even why. Not on its Web site, however, are the "PC Accident Prediction System" and rail cross- ing inventory databases. The "Accident Pre- diction System" is a searchable database that assigns an accident prediction to all public rail crossings nationwide. (The prediction system is available on CD-ROM.) The rail- crossing inventory is a database with specific information on all public rail grade crossings nationwide. 

Road 

Fatality Analysis Reporting System - 

The FARS is a database that theoretically contains detailed information about every fatal accident on the nation's roads. Because it relies upon local police departments, FARS is actually not that complete, but it's the best national picture of what's killing us on the highways. Some fields are the result of inter- pretation by traffic analysts, so be careful making judgments. 

Federal Highway Administration - www.fhwa.dot.gov 

Insurance Institute for Highway Safety- www.huysafety.org 

Agood source of studies on urban crashes, red-light cameras and insurance-related is- sues. Offers other links to road-related sites. 

National Highway Traffic Safety Ad- ministration - www.nhitsa.dot.gov 

Landings.com-www.landings.com - 

Look for the Crashworthiness Data Sys- tem for in-depth crash investigations. See the Crash Outcome Data Evaluation System, a relatively obscure NHTSA database that tracks the outcome of accidents, medical bills, etc. This information is usually hard to get because it's only collected by insurance companies, which are not public entities. Under the "CARS" link, see the downloadable collection of databases on consumer com- plaints, recalls, and Technical Service Bulle- tins (minor fix-it-for-free notices by car com- panies). The records detail whether injuries, deaths or property damage resulted from the problem that prompted the complaint. 

Other 

Bureau of Transportation Statistics - www.bts.gov 

The granddaddy of all free transportation database collections. Get information on waterways, rail, roads, accidents, travel, you name it - and everything is free. See the National Personal Transportation Survey at www.bts.gov/ntdaln.pts for measures of travel by American households. BTS is developing less esoteric measures of transportation and exploring new ways to visualize data. The Bureau is also undertaking a variety of train- ing initiatives to improve understanding of both data products and analytical methods. 

16


From page four: CAR poster child 

jails and juvenile detention centers were re- moved. Non-violent incidents at police or sheriff facilities and jails and juvenile centers also were removed. 
Incidents reported at shopping malls were excluded from per capita calculations SO they would not skew rates in surrounding neighborhoods. 
We mapped where the incident hap- pened, not where it was reported. If you are going to group your locations into larger areas like census tracts or block groups, be careful when mapping intersections. Deter- mine on which corner the incident hap- pened. If that is not feasible, randomly assign intersection incidents to the converging geo- 
graphic areas. 
If looking at incidents over a number of years, get population figures or estimates for as many years during that period as possible, then average them for your per capita rate. Using just one year may not be accurate if population is growing or declining substantially 
Because our data arrived in installments, the incident reports did not all end at the same time. We had homicides through July 9, 1997, drug offenses and robberies through July 22, arson cases through August 25, etc. So we weighted our crime rates for each offense. 
Carol Napolitano can be reached by e-mail at carolnap@owh.com 

From page five: Tools for readers 

makes plotting each incident impractical. But in areas with few crimes where it is possible to plot each incident, it gives readers a greater degree of specificity. 

More step-by-step 

As with the crime-rate map, get all the incident data in an electronic format. The only difference is that you do not need census tract information for this map. 
Again, using a database manager, create a table of crimes you want to analyze. The table must include the exact address or block number and street name. 

Make sure the mapping program in- cludes street level information for your city. Street level information is available (at a cost) with most mapping programs. You may also be able to find a friendly person in your city planning department who can help provide that information. 
Then, again, using your mapping pro- gram, plot the table of crimes. Happy mapping! 

Naomi Aoki can be reached by e-mail at aoki@pilotonline.com 

From page seven: Measuring cash flow 

in various ways. An Intranet also gives data access to a reporter working from home or on the road. 

CONFERENCE AUDIO 

TAPES: 

Maintaining the database 

The campaign finance database increases in value when it's maintained and contribution data is continuously collected as candidates file their reports. 

AUDIO TAPES FROM SESSIONS AT THE MARCH 1998 NICAR NATIONAL 

"Campaign finance databases are living and breathing things,' Raymond says. "They don't end at the end of an election cycle. Right after the election you have a whole other set. What happens in a newsroom is that they look at 

CONFERENCE AND THE JUNE 1998 IRE NATIONAL CONFERENCE ARE NOW AVAILABLE FOR ORDERING. FOR MORE INFORMATION OR A DOWNLOADABLE ORDER FORM, POINT YOUR BROWSER TO wwW.IRE.ORG/TRAINING AUDIO. HTML 

these things like a project with a beginning and end date." Raymond's company offers to maintain databases for newspapers and suggests, though from an obviously biased point of view, con- tracting out that duty to an outside party. "It's almost inviting a waste of money if you try to do it in-house," Raymond says. "That's when they set it up as a project as a one-time shot. Then the next election comes and it's going to be: 'We' pitch it to somebody again. Dig it out and start from ground zero. Cindy Eberting can be reached by e-mail at cindy@nicar.org 

17


ON THE INTERNET 

Searching for influence 

NICAR'S DATABASE EBRARY CAN CONVERT DATA: FROM ALL TYPES OF GOVERNMENT SYSTEMS: THE STAFF CAN TAKE NINE TRACK TARES, 4MM DAT TAPES 3480/3490E CARTRIDGES 

PRINT IMAGE FILES OR TRAD TR2 EAPES AND PUTHEM 

PERFORMS 

LIBRARY AT (573) 882-0684 

By Matt Jacob CFIC 

ONTO CD-ROM INETHE 

DATABASE FORMAT OF 

FOR MORE INFORMATION 

With the 2000 elections quickly approach- ing, we at the Campaign Finance Informa- tion Center are giving our all to help journal- ists make the most of election stories. Won- dering how much money the local insurance salesman running for state representative re- ceived? Interested in how much money a candidate received from out-of-state con- tributors? 

Following the campaign money trail in its entirety is one way journalists can provide more in-depth coverage of candidates. CFIC helps by collecting state campaign finance data from across the nation, making the data avail- able to journalists, teaching reporters how to work with the data and offering story ideas. 

YOUR CHOICE THE NICAR 

STAFF CLEANS AND 

CONVERTS THE DATA AND 

INTEGRITY CHECKS PRICES 

ARE BASED ON THE SIZE OF 

The CFIC Web site - www.campaign finance.org - is our central resource for jour- nalists. A recent overhaul of the site provides what we think is a more user-friendly envi- ronment. Listed here are the site's features, about which we welcome your comments via e-mail at cfic-comments@ire.org. 

YOUR NEWS 

ORCANFATION 

Individual state pages 

WALL THE DATABASE 

Having collected information on every state, we have built a page for each. State pages offer the source and range of our infor- mation, and when available, a breakdown of top contributors, state contribution limits, contribution reporting forms and links to state-specific search engines and to state elec- tion Web sites. 

Power search 

Out of our compiled data we've built a comprehensive search engine that allows jour- nalists to track contribution cash flow across state lines for both federal and state races. The search provides who gives what to which can- didates (contributions) as well as how the candidates spend their donations (expendi- tures). In some cases, it includes money flow to and from political action committees (PACs), candidate committees and party committees. 

Stories and tips: Covering campaign finance 

The CFIC collects stories that use cam- paign finance dara to show how private money influences public policy. Journalists can search 

stories by publication, state, date and head- line keyword. We also offer a list of sources specializing in campaign finance and tip sheets written by reporters that cover campaign finance issues. 

Training 

Using the resources and excellent training programs of Investigative Reporters and Edi- tors and the National Institute of Computer- Assisted Reporting, the CFIC plans to offer seminars specific to covering campaign fi- nance. Journalists will learn the skills they need to dig through data and come out with a story. The CFIC Web site will offer details on these seminars as they become available. There will also be sessions on covering cam- paign finance at both the IRE and NICAR national conferences. 

Networking 

The CFIC has compiled the names, phone numbers and e-mail addresses of reporters covering campaign finance into a searchable database. Journalists can search by name, affiliation, city or state. The center also main- rains a mailing list for journalists to exchange ideas and tips. To subscribe to CFIC-L, send an e-mail to majordomo@campaign finance.org In the body of the message, type: subscribe cfic-1 your e-mail address. The ar- chives of the listserv can be searched online at http://notes.reporter.org:8080/cfic-l.nsf 

Tracker 

Tracker is the CFIC's newsletter dedi- cated to campaign finance coverage. Pub- lished quarterly, it is also available for view- ing on our Web site. Each issue contains stories written by reporters working with campaign finance records. They share tips and tactics for tackling these often complex investigations. Past issues are also posted. 

Helpful links 

We've pulled together a detailed list of other Web sites especially useful to journal- ists who are following the campaign money trail. These sites can help journalists pur their data in some context with candidate profiles and candidate voting records. We also give other sources for campaign finance data. 

Continued on page nineteen 

18


CFIC revamped 

From page eighteen: 

State sites 

New York State Campaign Finance Con- sortium (http://wnww.timesunion.com/capitoi/ contributions) 

Newsday, The New York Times, Associ- ated Press and the Albany Times Union joined together to build a statewide darabase. The Albany Times Union has put the data in a searchable database on this site. 

Virginia Public Access Project (http:// www.crp.org/vpap) 

The VPAP is a non-partisan, non-profit group that demonstrates how information technology can improve public awareness of money's role in Virginia politics. The Center for Responsive Politics helped make the data searchable. 

Wisconsin Democracy Campaign (http:// wisdc.org) 

From this site journalists can search gu- bernatorial contributions and expenditures and view legislative candidate contributions and expenditures to senate and house candi- dates. 

Florida Division of Elections Campaign Finance Database (http://election.dos state.fl.us/campfin/contrib.htm) Campaign finance contribution data is searchable online and downloadable in a file of tab-separated columns suitable for import- ing into most spreadsheets or databases. 

Federal sites 

Center for Responsive Politics (http:// www.crp.org) Reports describing candidates' sources of funds broken down by industry, metro area and ZIP code. This site also provides in-state and out-of-state comparisons. The CRP site also hosts a number of online engines for searching individual state campaign finance data. FEC Info (http://www.tray.com/feciffo) Up-to-date FEC filings are searchable from this site, an excellent alternative for most users to downloading FEC files. Matt Jacob can be reached by e-mail at matt@nicar.org 

POWER BOOST THE DATABASE LIBRARY RECENTLY PURCHASED 3480/3490/3490E TAPE DRIVE. IN THE LIBRARY'S EXPERIENCE PROCESSING LOCAL AND FEDERAL DATA SETS: FT APPEARS THAT MANY AGENCIES ARE MOVING TOWARD THE 3490E FORMAT, WHICH IS WRIT TEN AT 36 TRACK IF YOU RECEIVE DATA IN THIS FORMAT NICAR CAN NOW PROCESS IT. 

Location: htts:/hwww.campaignfinance.erg/ 

Campainn
 relance
Campaign Finance

information
 Canter
Information Center
 PowerSearch
Calcuiating Influence: How All Adds Up
 nation
 About CFIC
A program investigative
 Whereard
Reporters and Editors
 What Awe-do
 Stories and Tips
Click on any state to see what campaign finance data is available
1/2 hrs site is still under construction. Please be patient
 Training
 IRE Creampaign brance
 SERVINGEN
VT
 Networking

finance
ND
 reporters
MA
 Tracker
RI

SD

Ordering Data
WY

A

from us
NE
 Helpful Links
NV
WV
MD

CO
MO
VA
DC

NC

OK
AR
SC

NM

MS
AL
GA

Data from CRC
 Other Data Sources
 General Information


Check out the new and improved homepage for the Campaign Finance Information Center, www.campaignfinance.org. 

19


TECH Tip 

Can't get a date? 

IF YOU HAVE A

PARTICUL AR PROB EM YOU

WOULD LIKE TO SEE

ADDRESSED IN FUTURE

TECH HP SEND AN E-MAIL

TO BRENT JOHNSON AT

BjOHNSON@NICAR.ORG

SUBSCRIBE ONLINE

You CAN NOW

TO UPLINK ONLINE DIRECT

YOUR MEB BROWSER TO

www IRE ORGISTORE

PERIODICALSHTML


By Richard Mullins NICAR/Missouri School of journalism Before we started using databases and spreadsheers, we probably never thought about data types - the difference between text and numbers and dates and all that A few bewildering sort results and a couple of type-mismatch errors later (plus the one 

Knowing your software is not just technical trivia or the mastering of minutiae to impress people at work Eventually, doing your journalistic duty to know exactly how and why you got a certain answer will require you to look behind the curtain. 

about the ZIP codes with the missing zero in the front), and we're all the wiser. 

We learned the rules for queries: Use quotes for text but not for numbers. Use a special sign to quote dates: {4/1/98} in FoxPro, or #4/1/98# in Access. 

In Access, you get full-time data-type help along these lines in the query design window. Use a wildcard for a field criteria, and the program will automatically quote the criteria and add the keyword LIKE. Use a date for a criteria, and it will automatically put the pound signs around it. Of course, you are on your own if you type the query text yourself in the SQL window. 

Now to the point. The column this month comes from a question we got at NICAR recently. There is a short answer to make the query work. The long answer involves under- standing how Access does things so you'll understand why things work the way they do. Knowing your software is not just technical trivia or the mastering of minutiae to impress people at work, although you can get by for quite some time without the ordeal of read- ing the fine print in the manual - or a long- winded tech tip. Eventually, doing your jour- 

nalistic duty to know exactly how and why you got a certain answer will require you to look behind the curtain. 

It is possible to type a query in Access, using a date criteria, which Access decides is just peachy, syntax-wise, and you'll get an answer back that will make you think: "My query didn't work" or "This can't be right." 

Let's say you are working with a dataset in Access that has a date field called Insp Date. The table could be dams or rental property. You decide you want to see all the dams that were inspected in 1995. You could, for any number of rea- sons, type a query like this: 

SELECT * FROM Dams WHERE InspDate = 1995 

Or, if you are using Design view, you typed 1995 in the criteria grid under the InspDate column. 

Because it has no syntax errors, the query would run. Most likely, however, your result would have zero rows, which you would think couldn't be right because you know you saw some 1995 dates when browsing the data. If you happened to be seeking inspections after 1995, so that the criteria was > 1995, you most likely would get a result that included every row in the table. Again, you'd think, this can't be right. 

You get what you ask for 

Here's the real problem. Access gave you just what you asked for; you just didn't know why or how. 

At this point, a FoxPro user might point out that the problem is a data-type mis- match. You didn't use a date in the crite- ria, they'd say. You used a number that represents only the year portion of a com- piete calendar date. It's a good answer, but it still doesn't help. How come you didn't get a type-mismatch error when you com- pared a number to a date? How come, if you used the design view, Access didn't put the pound signs around the criteria like it usually does? How come = 1995 got no rows and > 1995 got all the rows? 

Continued on page twenty-one 

20


From page twenty: Storage schematic 

The answer to all these questions is that Access stores date/time information as a num- ber. For dates in 1999, for example, the number is 36161 or higher. Specific times of day are stored internally as a fraction of the whole number for that day. So for the date we know on the calendar as January 11, 1999, Access stores this internally as 36171. For noon on that date, the number is 36171.5. For 11:33 that night, the number is 36171.98125. This is all internal. You can display the calendar equivalent of the date in your table and in queries in many different ways, from short (1/11/99) to long (Janu- ary 11, 1999). 

The number is based on the number of days elapsed since a certain base date. In Access 97, the base date, or Day Number One, is December 31, 1899. Dates before that base date are stored as negative num- bers. Part of the explanation here is that Access is being flexible, allowing you to refer to date values by the conventional calendar representations or the underlying number. 

This explains the answers to queries like InspDate = 1995 or InspDate > 1995. Like all software, Access doesn't know what you meant to ask, only what you actually asked. And it didn't give an error message because you tried to use a number as a criteria for a date column. It interpreted your criteria of 1995 not as the year 1995 but as the 1995th day since December 31, 1899, or June 17, 1905. If your data are apartment inspections, then probably none of them have a recorded inspection date that old, so your query would return zero rows. But most of them probably have a date later than 1905, so your query would return all the rows that have some date recorded. Both results were not what you expected, hence this long attempt to explain how to reconcile what you got with what you expected to get. 

Unleashing built-in functions 

According to a calendar I checked, the vernal equinox this year occurs March 20, 1999 at 8:46 PM, Eastern Standard Time. That's 36239.8652777778 in the Access date- storage scheme. 

If you want to see more of how this works, try a query like this on a table that has a date column in it. SELECT InspDate, CDbl (InspDate) FROM Dams 

The Access function, CDbl converts whatever is inside the parentheses to a double- precision number. 

Here are two solutions for what to do when you meant to ask for all the dams inspected some time in 1995. The first one involves remembering to use full dates - not just the year - in the criteria. 

SELECT * FROM Dams WHERE InspDate between #1/1/1995# and #12/ 31/1995# 

The other solution involves taking advan- tage of built-in functions in Access (and FoxPro) that let you pluck out certain parts of a calendar date. 

SELECT * FROM Dams WHERE year (InspDate) = 1995 

To find all the dams inspected in March: 

SELECT * FROM Dams WHERE month (InspDate) 11 3 

To find all the dams inspected on the 5th of the month: 

SELECT FROM Dams WHERE day (InspDate) = 5 

To find all the dams inspected on Monday: SELECT FROM Dams WHERE DayOfWeek (InspDate) = 2 

All of these functions look at the date and return a number that describes the compo- nent of the date you asked for: the number of the year; the number of the month (between 1 and 12); the number of the day (between 1 and 31); or the number of the day of the week (between 1 and 7). For day of the week, Sunday is 1 by default. This can be changed. Richard Mullins can be reached by e-mail 

To STEER YOUR CAR 

PROJECTS IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION, ORDER THE SECOND EDITION OF 

COMPUTER ASSISTED REPORTING A PRACTICAL 

GUIDE BY BRANT 

HOUSTON IT PROVIDES A GATEWAY TO THE FIELD 

FOR BOTH BEGINNING AND 

EXPERIENCED JOURNALISTS 

WHO NEED TO LEARN ESSENTIAL SKIELS AND GET UP TO SPEED IN THE 

COMPUTER AGE. A PC DISK:WITH DATA 

EXERCISES IS INCLUDED 

FOR A LIST OF OTHER TITLES AVAILABLE FROM 

IRE AND NICAR OR FOR INFORMATION ON 

ORDERING ONLINE VISEE 

THE IRE BOOKSTORE AT www IRE ORG STORE BOOKS 

at richard@nicar.org


21




2:30 P.M. PANELS	1:30 P.M. PANELS	11:00 A.M. PANELS
Boston	Panel 1 - Online quick-start, part 2:	Panel 1 - Census In-Depth, Part 1: Data	Panei 1 - Crime in-Depth, Part 3: Cor-
Getting what you pay for online	sets to profile your community-	rections records and how they can
strengths and weaknesses of pay ser-	the Census and its cousins	help you cover stories from prison and
vices	beyond
CAR	Panel 2 - Giving at home: How state
Pane! Editing the story: How to ask	campaign finance stories shook up the	Panel News and Numbers: A primer
questions when you don't know the	'98 elections	on responsible use of numbers in the
Party	data	newsroom
Panel 3 - CAR Quick Hits: Setting your
Panel 3 - Satellite imagery on your	sights on enterprise dailies and short	Panel 3 - Understanding health care
desktop - Practical projects for jour-	weekenders	databases, from birth and sickness to
nalists	death
2:30 P.M. PANELS
3:30 P.M. PANELS	Panel 1 - Census In-Depth, Part 2: Cen-	Demo room Data integrity check-up:
The National	Panel 1 - Investigative reporting in an	sus 2000 nuts and bolts: Details you	Tips and tricks for keeping your data
online world - Pitfails & opportunities	need to get ready and stories you can	clean and your confidence high
Computer-Assisted	do now
Panel 2 - Library leadership:	1:30 P.M. PANELS
Reporting Conference	How researchers can take a more ac-	Panel 2 - Federal campaign finance:	Panel 1 - Public records supersession,
March 11-14, 1999
tive role in CAR	Before and after the elections	Part 1: Negotiating for data with reluc-
tant local officials
Panel 3 - Cool toois to get you done	Panel 3 - CAR on deadline What you
PRELIMINARY SCHEDULE	with the drudge work and back to your	can do in an hour if you're prepared	Panel 2 - From collisions to conges-
story	tion: Covering the transportation beat
WEDNESDAY, MARCH 10TH	3:30 P.M. PANELS	with CAR
Panel 1 - Census In-Depth, Part 3: Gini,
6:00 P.M. TO 9:00 P.M.	FRIDAY, MARCH 12TH	diversity, dissimilarity and other tools	Panel -Taxes, sprawl and land scams:
Pre-registration	to profile your community	Using CAR to report on property
9:00 A.M. PANELS
Panel 1-Local Reporting In-Depth, Part	Panel 2 - CAR on a shoestring Getting	2:30 P.M. PANELS
THURSDAY, MARCH 11TH	1: Adding depth with budgets and	the story when you're on your own	Panel 1 - Public records supersession,
salaries	without a budget	Part 2: Privacy and privatization, the
9:00 A.M.	latest threats to public access
Opening Remarks	Panel 2 - Back to the future:	Panel 3 - CAR around the world: Up-
Using computer-assisted reporting to	dates from Scandanavia, Latin America	Panel 2 - From newsroom to class-
10:00 A.M. PANELS	organize your shoe-leather reporting	and the U. K.	room: Translating what you've learned
Panel 1 - Tackling the school report	for the next generation
evaluating your school system's	Panel The latest investigative projects	5:00 P.M. PANELS
performance	from broadcast	Panel 1 - Intranet models from around	Panel 3 If it flies it crashes: Big or little,
the country	getting ready for the plane crash in your
Panel 2 Everyone's CAR: A quick look	Demo room -Understanding how sig-	area
at beat and project stories from the	nificance testing can lead your report-	Panel 2 - CAR after 10 Years: A look at
past year	ing	where it has been and where it's going	3:30 P.M. PANELS
Panel 1 - Public records supersession,
Panel 3 - Running an Intranet the right	10:00 A.M. PANELS	Part 3: What you can do to preserve
way: Performance and maintenance	Panel -Local Reporting In-Depth, Part	SATURDAY, MARCH 13TH	public records or open them when
issues to problem solving and user	2: Covering the election, from cam-	they're closed
warnings	paign finance to election night	9:00 A.M. PANELS
Panel 1 - Crime In-Depth, Part 1: inci-	Panel 2-Shepherding CAR the news-
11:00 A.M. PANELS	Panel 2 - Dead voters to deadly work-	dent reports from start to finish	room: Thinking critically while selling
Panel 1 Beginning computer-assisted	places Five classic CAR stories, and	the stories
reporting: The tools of the trade	what you need to do them yourself	Panel 2 Marrying science and CAR on
the environment beat	Panel 3 - Tips for building your own
Panel 2 From portable classrooms to	Panel 3 - Training models that work:	database when you can't beg or bor-
new buildings: Covering your school	Tactics for spreading computer-as-	Panel 3 Computer-assisted reporting	row one that someone else made
system's capital budget	sistedreporting through the newsroom	without public data: Getting the story
from observations, compilations and
Panel 3 - Building a data warehouse	Demo room - Sampling in the news-	other sources	SUNDAY, MARCH 14TH
What to update and how often with-	room: Testing court records, on-time
out creating 6 monster	performance and other independent	Demo room - Check it out: How to	10:00 A.M. PANELS
studies	verify a database's details	Panel 1 - Taking it all back home: Tricks
1:30 P.M. PANELS	for making the conference stick when
Panel 1 - Online quick-start: Getting	11:00 A.M. PANELS	10:00 A.M. PANELS	you get back to the newsroom
the most out of Internet search engines	Panel 1-Local Reporting In-Depth, Part	Panel 1 - Crime in-Depth, Part 2: Polic-
and alert services	3: Following the dollar in public spend-	ing your police	Panel Wrap-up for database editors
ing: Vendors, grants and contracts	and computer-assisted reporting CO-
Panel 2 - Covering welfare reform, ur-	Panel 2 - Three nursing home stories	ordinators: The best of the conference
ban housing and other social issues	Panei2-Coveringtheuniversity: Sports,	that made a difference	to spread to your newsroom
crime and enrollment
Pane! 3 - Putting it on the Web: Make	Panel 3 - Writing the story: Getting	11:00 A.M. PANEL
it easy to share your hard-fought data-	Panel Training by doing: First stories	people while build-	Swap meet One last chance to swap
bases with the newsroom and readers	to get reporters' juices flowing and	ing the CAR narrative	great materials from your newsroom,
with PERL and VBA	skills growing while building a data	your classroom or the conference
library for deadline	Demo room Documenting your data-
Demo room - 10 Great Tips using the	bases and keeping them organized
standard newsroom toois: Excel, Ac-	Demo room - Making the leap from
cess and FoxPro	linger to logistic regression



Boston
 CAR

Party


1999 National CAR Conference in Boston 

Investigative Reporters and Editors, the National institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting and The Boston Globe 

present 

The National Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference 

Learn to find facts on the Internet, do data- base reporting on deadline, map crime, analyze budgets, per- form statistical analysis and more. 

For more information, call us at 573-882-0684 or see the IRE Web page at www.ire.org 

HOTEL REGISTRATION National CAR Conference March 11-14. 999 

March 11 - 14, 1999 

The Fairmont Copley Plaza 138 St James Avenue, Boston MA 02116 Reservations 800-527-4727 Dial Direct 617-267-5300 Room Rate: 59single/ double occupancy 

Reservations must be made by February 19 1999 torreceive discounted rate Reservation requests received after the cut off date will be accepted on a space and rate available basis Need arcommate at (573)-882-2042 or VISIT the IRE Web site at www.ree.org to join the reommate list 

Conference Site: The Fairmont Copley Plaza 

Register early to ensure you get your first choices for hands-on training classes. To register, make sure you fill out this form and the hands-on training form included in this preliminary program. Check our Web site for the latest changes and details. 

REGISTRATION FORM 

Please write carefully! This information will be used to make your name-tag. 

Name:

Affiliation:

Address:

City, State:

Zip Code:

-
E-mail:

Phone:

Fax:


To attend this conference, you must be a current IRE member through 4/1/99. 

($150) I am an IRE professional mem- ($205) I would like to attend the main ber and would like to attend the main conference days March 11-14 and need conference days, March 11-14. to join or renew international mem- bership. 
($100) I am an IRE student member and would like to attend the main ($125) I would like to attend the main conference days, March 11-14. conference days March 11-14 and need to join or renew student membership. 
($190) I would like to attend the main conference days March 11-14 - and Total - -Add ($25) Late fee for registra- need to join or renew U.S. member- tions postmarked after February 26, ship. 1999 

To register, mail this form and a check to NICAR, 138 Neff Annex, Missouri School of Journalism, Columbia, MO, 65211. To register by credit card, you must have a Visa or Mastercard.WecannotacceptAmerican Express. You may fax your registration to (573)882- 5431 or register on-line at www.ire.org. 

Visa or Mastercard #
Exp.Date:
 Card Holder:
Card Holder Signature:


Bits, Bytes and Barks 

IRE Web site overhaul 

Investigative Reporters and Editors has Flaunched a re yamped Web site aimed at better serving current members and drawing future members. The They sure while containing many of the features of the formersite, IS easter to navigate, offers more options for doing business with IRE staffand debuts some new features. There are more online registration forms and order forms. The TRE Store offers books, tapes and other IRE goods for easy purchase Along with the popular job posting board. a fellowship /grant posung board is new available: The sare will soonsmake use of members only areas allowing members: EE access the latest Issue of The TRE Journal, reporter tipsheets, archived listservs, a personal information update area and more Members will receive passwordsin them an before any members only gates gompa Work on thesite will continue Educators especially will be sought QUE to contribute to the IRE Journalism Educa to Center Subjections are welcome Contributionsare urged. E-mail should be sent directly to Deputy Director 1 en Bnizzese at fen@ite.org 

Moving on 

Sarah Cohen formerly the trainer for TRE and NICAR hasjpined The Washington Post If you have recently switched locales let tis chear from you Send an e-mail to Bren Johnson at bjohnson@nican.org 

New On the Road Trainer joins IRE and NICAR 

Tom McGinty, areporter with The Times of Trenton has jomed Investigative Reporters and Editors as its new on the road trainer. 

McGinty will primarily teach computer assisted report ing techniques at regional and newsroom workshops for NICAR 

McGinty, who coordinated the CAR efforts of The Times served inteats ranging from:cops and counts to local and state government and general assignment. 

Reporters and editors will identify with this from line experience, said Brant Houston, IRE S executive director Tom knows how to translaté the training IBTO terms news people wall understand McCumty earned a journalism degreefrom Jaca College of Syracuse University 

IRE National conference 

The Investigative Reporters and Editors National Con ference: w spensores by The Kansas City Star and KCTV, willibeheld June 346: E999 in Kansas City You may also register online or download an early registration form at www me greft sources Information on other IRE and NICAR national and regional conferences is available at www are QTQ firaming conferences himl 

OIL 987 ON alvd sn DHO 

11259 OW 10 loous unossiji JO HaN 8EI pur pue 

24
