January/February 2000 

ON THE BEAT 

Religion with CAR 

By David Crumm 

Detroit Free Press 

Searching for God at the turn of the mil- lennium requires more than prayer and medi- tation. It takes a computer. 

The subject is vast and is growing more diverse by the decade. In the United States, 9 out of 10 Americans tell pollsters that they pray and are part of some religious group. While the vast majority of Americans claim to be Christian, most Christians feel increas- ingly free to switch back and forth among dozens of different denominations - or, if they're feeling restless, to break away entirely 

CENSUS 2000 

Race tabulations 

By Steve Doig 

Arizona State University 

No problem in American society has been more chronic and vexing than that of race relations. Add to that the strains of demographic change caused by the im- migration to the United States of millions leaving their countries of birth to seek a better life here. The resulting frictions and adjustments are the source of many im- portant stories for journalists, and Cen- sus data is one of the best ways of mea- suring those changes. 

However, the actual tallying of persons by race and ethnic origin has changed greatly over time, and the differences in definitions and methodology from one Census to the next can make it difficult to do accurate comparisons. One of those big changes in methodology is occurring with the 2000 Census, and it will require careful attention from those of us who 

and form their own independent sects. 

The influences of the world's other major faiths are surfacing more frequently in con- temporary music, television, the Internet, movies and magazines. 

Outside the United States, religion also remains a major force for good or ill. It can be a powerful catalyst in ethnic strife, a fuel for political aspirations and, in many cases, a helpful inspiration toward resolving conflicts and building communities. 

To keep up with this amazingly complex landscape, I use my computer in four basic ways. 

Internet 

Continued on page seventeen 

As a journalist, I don't idly surf the Internet, because there are thousands of reli- gious Web sites and most of them are not factually reliable. 

Over the past five years, I've developed my own list of reliable religious Web sites, most of them sponsored by well-established groups. The list changes constantly as Web sites appear, evolve and disappear. A good place to start sorting out your own list of useful sites is the Yahoo index to religion, which you'll find linked off Yahoo's main page (as a sub-category of "Society & Culture"). 

A few of the sites I use most frequently are the Vatican's information-rich Web site at www. vatican. va, a large evangelical site at www.gospelcom.net that links to nearly 150 religious groups and a helpful site at www.wfn.org where many Protestant de- nominations post news releases. A superb place to background yourself on religious history and traditions is the recently upgraded www.britannica.com, sponsored by the ency- clopedia. 

By carefully sifting sites, the Internet has played a major role in my reporting on ev- 

Inside Uplink 

CENSUS 2000 

This issue includes two stories to get you prepared for Census 2000 data, in- cluding one on this page by Steve Doig of Arizona State University about changes in race classifications, and an- other by Doig and Griff Palmer, of The Daily Oklaho- man, on a formula they de- veloped for reapportion- ment. 

See page two 

MILITARY 

Russell Carollo of The Dayton Daily News tells how he tackled previously unexamined military avia- tion databases for his series "Falling from the sky." See page four 

HEALTH CARE 

Richard Dalton, Jr., and other reporters at Newsday used a variety of data to show how HMOs failed to tell cus- tomers about doctors who had been disciplined. See page seven 

Continued on page twenty-two 

CAR IN SCHOOLS 

David Kesmodel of IRE and NICAR examines whether journalism students around the country are get- ting hands-on training in computer-assisted reporting. See page thirteen 

CENSUS 2000 

Uplink 

January/February 2000 

Volume 12, Number I A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

EDITOR Brant Houston 

DIRECTOR OF 

PUBLICATIONS Len Bruzzese 

MANAGING EDITOR Mary Jo Sylwester 

ASSOCIATE EDITOR Jessica Larson Cindy Eberting 

ART DIRECTOR Kerrie Kirtland 

SUBSCRIPTION ADMINISTRATOR John Green 

Uplink is published every month by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting, 138 Neff Hall Annex Columbia, MO 65211. (573) 882-0684. Subscriptions are $40 for IRE members, $60 for nonmembers. Postmaster: Please send address changes to NICAR. Send e-mail to jgreen@nicar.org 

NICAR is a joint effort of Investigative Reporters and Editors and the University of Missouri School of Journalism. 

NICAR services include hands- on newsroom training in computer-assisted reporting, special academic and advanced training in data analysis. 

Reapportionment 

By Griffin Palmer 

The Daily Oklahoman and Steve Doig Arizona State University The 2000 Census isn't just a good idea - it's the law of the land. The U.S. Constitu- tion mandates a national headcount every ten years for one purpose, and the specified rea- son isn't to help fast-food franchisers decide where to build their next burger joint. Rather, the census is required for fairly apportioning the 435 seats in the House of Representa- tives among the 50 states. All other census applications, whether drawing political dis- trict lines, allocating federal funds or siting taco stands, are just constitutional gravy. 

The decennial reapportionment of Con- gressional seats means great stories, and they're the very first ones that will come out of actual 2000 Census data. By law, the Sec- retary of Commerce (who oversees the Bu- reau of the Census) will tell the President in late December of 2000 the official popula- tion of each state, and the President will then notify Congress. At that point, the blood- letting will officially begin. 

However, it's no trivial task to translate the states' populations into the number of seats each will get, as the two of us have learned. 

Because the number of Congressional seats is capped at 435, some fast-growing states will gain new seats at the expense of those with slower growth. Reapportionment means political musical chairs in the losing states, and a big scramble for the newly-open seats in gaining states. 

However, it's no trivial task to translate the states' populations into the number of seats each will get, as the two of us have learned. A simple proportional allocation (in which, for instance, a state with five percent 

of the nation's population gets five percent of the 435 seats) doesn't work for two rea- sons. For one, there are no fractional seats in Congress (although some of the occupants certainly are fractious), and so a proper rounding scheme would have to be devised. And more important, the Constitution guar- antees that even the smallest state will get at least one House-seat even if its share of the nation's population is "worth" less than half a seat. 

Equal proportions 

Numerous apportionment schemes have been devised, and five different ones actually have been used at various times in the nation's history. (See www.census.gov/population/ censusdatalapportn.pdf for a brief history of those methods, and www.census.gov/srd/pa- pers/pdffrr92-6.pdffor a more exhaustive dis- cussion of the history and mathematics of apportionment methods.) We'll only concern ourselves here with the so-called "method of equal proportions" which has been used since 1940 and was upheld unanimously in 1992 by the U.S. Supreme Court. 

Simulation 

We won't try to explain the mathematical reasoning that underlies the method of equal proportions, because then we'd have to pre- tend that we actually understand it ourselves. But we have devised an Excel spreadsheet that accurately simulates the method and thus will let you figure out where your state stands in the reapportionment shuffle. To satisfy yourself that it works, first we'll build the spreadsheet using the official 1990 popula- tions. Here's how: 

Open a new spreadsheet. 
Put these labels in the first row on the specified columns: A: "State", B: "Population", C: "Seat #", D: 
"Multiplier", E: "Priority value". 
Fill range A2:A51 with the names of the states. 
Fill range B2:B51 with the 1990 apportionment populations of the states (which you can find at www.census.gov/population/ censusdata/table-a.pdf) 
Fill range C2:C51 with the number 2. 

Continued on page three 

2


Census 2000 

Continued from page two: 

(We start this with seat 2 because every state is guaranteed at least one seat.) 

Put this formula in Cell D2: =1/ SQRT(C2*(C2-1)). The formal name for this multiplier is the "reciprocal of the geometric mean," in case you get asked on "Who Wants to be a Millionaire?" 
Put this formula in Cell E2: =D2*B2 
Put this formula in Cell A52: =A2 
Put this formula in Cell B52: =B2 
Put this formula in Cell C52: =C2+1 
Copy range A52:C52 all the way down to Row 2951. You'll know you did it right if "Wyoming", "455975" and "60" are on that row. 
Now select range D2:E2 and copy it all the way down to Row 2951, too. It worked if you see "0.0168073" and "7663.716" down there. 

(Okay, okay, here's what's happening. The method of equal proportions requires that you calculate a "priority value" for at least as many seats as each state could possibly get. As it turns out, the easiest thing to do is cal- culate such values for seats 2-60 for every state, on the grounds that not even Califor- nia will get as many as 60 seats. And 50 states times 59 priority values means 2,950 rows.) 

The decennial reapportionment of Congressional seats means great stories, and they're the very first ones that will come out of actual 2000 Census data. 

Now open a new sheet and follow these steps: 

Go back to your first table and copy the entire thing, all 2,951 rows and five columns. 

Use "Paste Special Values" to paste it onto the new sheet. 
Sort that second sheet by descending order of Priority Value 
Insert a blank row at Row 387. This cuts off the table at 385 seats. 
Insert 50 blank rows into Range A2:A51. 
Copy the names of the 50 states into Range A2:A51. 
Put a one (1) in Cell D2, and copy it down to Cell D51 

Whew. You now have a table with 435 records, one for each seat in Congress. To find out how many seats each state gets, sim- ply do a pivot table by dropping the State variable into both the Row and the Data boxes. 

The results 

The main table also is worth a detailed look because it shows the order in which the seats were parceled out. Notice, for in- stance, that California got 42 of its 52 seats before Idaho and Rhode Island got their second seats. Notice also the first few states in the remainder below your main table. Those are the ones that just missed get- ting another seat (at someone else's ex- pense, of course) and where much of the wailing was heard after the 1990 Census. 

Now that you've done one for 1990, re- peat the process using projected popula- tions for 2000, which you can find at www.census.gov/population/projections/statel stpjpop. You'll see plenty of winners and losers in the data. And if your state is near the bottom of the main table, or near the top of the leftovers, you'll know how im- portant a good census count will be to your readers - and your politicians. 

(A final note for FoxPro mavens: Grif- fin first developed this apportionment simulation using FoxPro. If you want a copy of his method, contact him by e- mail.) 

Steve Doig can be reached by e-mail at steve.doig@asu.edu 

Griffin Palmer can be reached by e-mail at gpalmer@oklahoman.com 

The U.S. Census Bureau's 2000 Census page: www.census.gov/dmd/wwwl 2khome.htm There you can get information about data releases and download 1990 population figures. 

Recent tipsheets on the census, available from the IRE Resource Center, include: 

"Using Census 2000 to Investigate Changes," (#1096) by Richard O'Reilly of the Los Angeles Times, for the 1999 IRE Los Angeles Regional Conference. This tipsheet gives reporters an idea of how they can start planning for the 2000 Census. 

"Preparing for the 2000 Census," (#1097) by Steve Doig, Arizona State University, for the 1999 IRE Los Angeles Regional Conference. Doig lists a series of tips on how to begin investigating census data "during the relative calm before the data storm hits." 

3


MILITARY AVIATION 

Uncovering secrets 

Russell Carollo's story "Falling from the sky" is available online at: www.activedayton.com/ news/1999/10/24/ falling.html. 

The series is also available from the IRE Resource Center (story #15844). Contact the Resource Center at (573) 882-3364 to order. 

Some tipsheets on covering the military, available from the Resource Center, include: "Checking out someone's military record," (#1107) by Don Ray, a freelance reporter, for the 1999 Los Angeles IRE Regional Conference. Lists sources and contact information for the National Archives and the National Personnel Records Center. 
"Fast Track: Military records," 106) by Vince Gonzales of CBS News, for the 1999 Los Angeles IRE Regional Conference. Provides pointers to locate sources from the Vietnam War era and modern military. 

By Russell Carollo 

Dayton Daily News 

The Dayton Daily News began its 18- month examination of military aviation safety with a fishing expedition. I was fish- ing for computer databases that hadn't been worked over by 100 reporters when I learned that no one had ever asked for any of the databases on military aviation accidents. 

So I filed Freedom of Information Act requests with the safety centers for the Air Force, Army and Navy, which includes the Marine Corps. (I gave up on the Coast Guard after numerous telephone calls and requests went unanswered.) Each service has its own database, and, though there are some simi- larities, the databases differ significantly from one another, even though some aircraft are flown by more than one service. 

Pilots who survived accidents and the relatives of pilots who were killed frequently had no idea of the findings we had discovered on the databases. 

Major civilian aviation accidents are in- vestigated by an independent body, the Na- tional Transportation Safety Board, and the results of NTSB investigations are made pub- lic. But major military aviation accidents usu- ally result in two separate internal investiga- tions: One done by one or more people who produce a public report, and the other, a more through investigation, done directly through one of the military safety centers. 

Interviews, findings, recommendations and conclusions of the second investigation the one done through a safety center - are secret, and the courts have upheld this se- crecy for years under the so-called Machan 

Privilege. Factual information, however, is not protected under the Machin Privilege. 

So from the beginning, getting informa- tion from the safety centers was not easy. I negotiated for months over what was factual and what was protected under the Machin Privilege. 

In the end, I got much more than ex- pected. Though the databases differed greatly from one another, each service provided simi- lar types of information: Dates and times of accidents, locations, types of aircraft, cost of accidents, types of injuries, names of crewmembers and even the names of parts believed to have failed. With the identity or parts suspected of failing, I had indications of what the secret safety investigation believed caused accidents - information usually kept from the public under the Machin Privilege. 

Under the surface 

But reading the databases wasn't easy. Anything military usually is filled with acronyms and coded language, and military aviation is padded with additional layers of technical jargon. Because of this, stories on military aviation require additional fact- checking, which should include a review by a military aviation expert. 

Dave Gulliver, who assisted with some of the data analysis, and I discovered that what appeared to be true on the surface often wasn't necessarily the case. For example, one part that appeared to have been linked to dozens of Army helicopter accidents turned out to be landing skids, something that frequently breaks during crash landings but is rarely the cause. 

Using the parts tables, we were able to link a single part or a single type of problem to dozens of accidents, concentrating on parts that eventually caused major accidents. In one case, we found that hydraulic problems in the Sea Knight helicopters had caused more than 71 emergencies and accidents from 1988 through July 1998. Nearly all of the cases involved the utility hydraulic pump, and in at least three cases, helicopters were destroyed and crews barely escaped with their lives. 

The Navy database even had a "reoccur- ring problem narrative," tracking problems 

4


Continued on page six 

ECONOMIC DATA 

Cost of living 

By Jennifer LaFleur And Michelle Quinn San Jose Mercury News 

When most people think of Silicon Val- ley, they think of two things: technology and money. If a few national reports are to be believed, nearly everyone in Metro San Jose is a millionaire. Earlier this year, a team of Mercury News reporters set out to find out just how much money is being made in Sili- con Valley, how it was distributed and how it has affected people's lives. What our analysis of several private and public databases found was that the valley is out of whack economically compared with the rest of the nation, riding a boom filled with paradoxes. According to one of the most aggressive estimates, 65,000 Santa Clara County house- holds - roughly 1 in 9 - are worth more than $1 million, not including the value of their homes. And yet, only 29 percent of Santa Clara County's households can afford the median- priced home, far below the national rate of 55 percent. And two out of five county households would need to stretch beyond advisable limits to rent the average two-bed- room apartment. 

The bottom line of using any of these types of data sources is to compare the results to other information. 

Perhaps most startling: although many people here earn exceptionally high pay com- pared with the rest of the country, most aren't particularly wealthy. Look at the net wealth of Santa Clara County households - their assets minus their debts - and the distribu- tion closely mirrors the nation's as a whole. 

Data sources 

This series used several sources of data. Our biggest concern was that the market data 

models truly reflected Silicon Valley. Because many market surveys cap home values and incomes low values for our area, we compared data from several sources. 

We ended up using wealth measures from Claritas, an Arlington, Va.-based marketing information firm, which estimates income and wealth distributions for the United States, including all ZIP codes and small ar- eas. Estimates are based on a combination of factors: extrapolation of census data, Claritas' Market Audit Survey and other area-specific sources of demographic data. The Market Audit Survey annually collects information on household assets, liabilities, demograph- ics and financial behavior for approximately 120,000 U.S. households. We used Claritas figures for some of the income data. A note of caution: If you plan to use any market data, make sure you fully understand the methodology used in their model and that you can verify it with other data sources. Also, these data are good for large metropoli- tan areas, but not as good for smaller areas. Additional sources of data we used to look at income included: Census Current Popu- lation Survey data (downloadable off www.census.gov using the Ferret extraction tool), for which we had to combine years to get a valid sample; and California state fran- chise tax board tax filing data. Using these data, we were able to show that the mean income was increasing faster than the me- dian income, showing that the higher end was pulling up the average. 

Housing data 

Although many things may seem expen- sive in Silicon Valley, the one driving factor behind most people's struggles is housing. We used California Association of Realtors data and data from the Real Estate Research Board of Northern California to look at trends in housing costs. Depending on how assessments are done in a particular area, property tax data might be useful for this as well. Because Proposition 13 froze Califor- nia assessment data at sales prices, it's not a useful tool for looking at housing costs. Rent data was harder to find. A few pri- vate companies do rent analysis, but they vary depending on how the data are gathered. 

The San Jose Mercury News' story, "The Cost of Living in Silicon Valley," is available online at www.sjmercury.com/svtech news/special/wealth/ 

Continued on page six 

Copies are also available in the IRE Resource Center (story #15718). Contact the Resource Center at (573) 882-3364 to order. 

5


Continued from page four: Secrets 

Some military Web sites: www.militarycity.com: Catch up on the latest military news. If you subscribe to the sponsors (Defense News, Army Times and affiliates), you can search for military personnel in a 4-million record database and get details on military installations. Sponsored by the publisher of Space News, Federal Times, Defense News and Army Times. 

http://icweb2.loc.gov/powi powhome.html: The Library of Congress' database includes synopses of all of the 131,000 publicly-available documents concerning military personnel listed as missing in action and prisoners of war from the Vietnam War. The site also includes instructions on how to order the full documents. 

www.reporter.org/beat/ military.html: Find other links to military sites on Shawn Mcintosh's Beat Page for covering the military. 

such as those in the Sea Knight that occurred more than once. One field actually totaled the numbers of times a problem had OC- curred, and the reoccurring problem narra- tive added comments, sometimes from com- manders concerned that the problem had not been fixed. 

The Air Force database had an engine table, complete with serial numbers of en- gines involved in accidents. With this table, were able to track engines that had been in more than once accident. We found one engine that had been on three F-16s in less then four months. Twice the engine was re- moved after pilots complained of smoke and fumes in the cockpit, and finally the engine was put on a third jet, which crashed into a South Carolina neighborhood, killing one man and injuring seven others. 

Beyond numbers 

Using the information we gathered from the database, we then sought the lengthy re- ports on the accidents, filing more than 150 Freedom of Information Act requests with the various services. We also spent months 

tracking down crewmembers, relatives of vic- tims, attorneys and other with information about the accidents. One of the most interesting aspects of the reporting came when we shared what we had learned from the computer records and ac- cident reports with pilots, accident investi- gators and other people who had investigated the accidents. Their explanations greatly en- hanced our ability to search the databases for the more significant problems and disre- gard other problems that - although they ap- peared significant - actually were minor. Pilots who survived accidents and the relatives of pilots who were killed frequently had no idea of the findings we had discov- ered on the databases. Several people explored legal action as the results of telephone calls from the Dayton Daily News concerning our findings, and at least one attorney changed his lawsuit, add- ing to it a company our records showed pro- duced parts the Army had questioned. Russell Carollo can be reached by e-mail at rcarollo@coxohio.com 

Continued from page five: Cost of living 

HUD Fair Market Rent measures are a good start, although they estimate rents lower than the median for an area. Another source for rent data is RealFacts. 

The RealFacts data inventory has been assembled over a period of years, and pro- vides complete and current information on more than 4,000 apartment complexes in 10 Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs), in- cluding California, Oregon, Washington, Nevada, Utah and New Mexico. These tend to be slightly higher because they are for apartment complexes. 

Income data 

To get a handle on how much money in- siders in Silicon Valley made, we used a da- tabase of SEC corporate insider trading files from Thomson Financial Wealth Identifica- tion (formerly CDA). We used this to get an estimate of the number of people with 

large amounts of wealth. 

To figure out the value of stock options held by employees of select Silicon Valley companies, Institutional Shareholder Services did an analysis based on 10-K filings and sev- eral other company factors such as turnover. 

After analyzing many economic measures for Silicon Valley, we had a starting point. As with any data-based project, the data are the beginning. The bottom line of using any of these types of data sources is to compare the results to other information. 

The large amounts of data that we gath- ered were not all included in the stories, but we were able to make many of them avail- able online so that individuals could look up wealth, income and other measures for their neighborhoods. 

Jennifer LaFleur, who now works for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, can be reached by e-mail at jlafleur@postnet.com 

6


HEALTH CARE 

Disciplined doctors 

Richard J. Dalton, Jr. Newsday 

A landmark lawsuit, a monstrous database and rigorous searching using healthcare Web site search engines lie behind a recent Newsday series on disciplined doctors work- ing in managed care. 

Newsday's series, reported over a 10-month period, revealed that doctors who have been punished for serious or even fatal wrongdo- ing often continue to work for managed-care companies despite the healthcare industry's promise to screen their doctors and offer the best care to patients. 

While many papers have examined HMOs' denial of treatment, this series broke ground by demonstrating that managed-care companies employ disciplined doctors, effec- tively breaking their promise of quality care. 

Staff writer Thomas Maier reported and wrote the series, with computer analysis by this reporter and Dave Ewalt and assistance by Bob Fresco. 

The Health Department regularly releases information from the database to researchers and reporters but removes data identifying doctors to preserve their privacy. 

Before starting on the series, Newsday and The New York Times put its lawyers to work, suing the New York State Department of Health to obtain a database of information about the performance of doctors in treating patients in New York hospitals. 

The Health Department regularly releases information from the database to research- ers and reporters but removes data identify- ing doctors to preserve their privacy. That meant key information remained secret, in- 

cluding the license numbers of attending and operating physicians working on the patient, the admission date, payor identification number and the hospital name. 

The omission of such information made it impossible to determine the quality of care by individual doctors and hospitals. 

The newspapers argued that physicians had no such right to privacy but agreed that the data about individual patients should re- main private. In June 1998, a state appeals court agreed with a lower-court ruling sid- ing with the media, allowing access to the database of millions of hospital admissions. 

Web sites 

When the legal battles subsided, the scene of action turned to the World Wide Web for a Health Department Web site listing disciplined doctors, managed-care company sites listing doctors in the networks and the American Board of Medical Specialties' site revealing doctors with board certification. 

The healthcare companies and agencies probably never envisioned their Web sites be- ing scrutinized in the manner Maier examined them. From the board-certification site, he found doctors who erroneously claimed board certification in managed-care listings. 

From the HMO sites, he didn't find a new doctor, he uncovered disciplined doctors-132 of them disciplined in New York state in the 1990s. 

Using brief descriptions of the disciplinary actions from the Health Department Web site, we created a database of disciplined doctors, including their names, license numbers, ad- dresses, discipline dates and whether the doc- tors were board certified. We also noted the doctors' offenses, such as patient mistreatment, sexual misconduct or billing errors, and the disciplinary actions, such as suspension, pro- bation or license revocation. 

Next, we began to quantify how many pro- cedures these doctors oversaw after they were disciplined, and how much money patients or insurers paid for care overseen by these disci- plined doctors. 

Data work 

The hospital admission data contained millions of procedures performed from 1990 

The Newsday series, "Managed Care and Doctors: The Broken Promise," is available online at 

Continued on page eight 

www.newsday.com/news/ doctors/edocs14.htm 

The story, and other investigative stories, can also be accessed through the IRE and NICAR Web site list of online investigative projects at www.ire.org/datalibraryl online.html 

7


Continued from page seven: Doctors 

Following is the Microsoft Access module. To use it, run an update query, replacing the admitdate field with the following: 

firstdate([admitmo], [admityr]), where admitmo and admityr are the fields representing the month and year of the admission. 

Option Compare Database Option Explicit 

Public Function FirstDate(mCnt As Long, yCnt As Long) As Date Dim dCnt As Byte Dim y2Cnt As Integer Dim NewDate As Date y2Cnt = yCnt - 1900 NewDate = #1/1/ 1900# NewDate = DateAdd("yyyy", (y2Cnt), NewDate) FirstDate = DateAdd("m", (mCnt 1), NewDate) End Function 

through 1998. Using SPSS, we extracted the procedures overseen by doctors disciplined anytime in the 1990s. 

That database contained 130,000 records, but only some procedures were performed after the attending or operating physicians were disciplined. We then matched the da- tabase with the list of disciplined doctors to uncover procedures performed after the dis- cipline date. 

The discipline date field was straightfor- ward. But, as is common with most govern- ment data, the database of hospital procedures from the Statewide Planning and Research Cooperative System, which contained the hos- pital admission date, was quite quirky. 

The admission date in the database was divided into three fields: a year, a month, and a day - not a day of the month, but a day of the week. 

We wanted to ensure that we only counted patient visits and hospital charges that occurred after the doctor was punished to demonstrate that taxpayer money was being spent on medi- cal care overseen by disciplined doctors. But the unusual format of the admission date pre- sented a problem when a patient visited a doc- tor in the same month the doctor was disci- plined. 

So we decided to turn every admission date into the first of the month. If a patient was admitted in November 1998, we turned that into Nov. 1, 1998, using a module written in Microsoft Access and an update query. 

Suppose the patient had been treated in November 1998 and the attending physician was disciplined on Nov. 20 of that month. Using Nov. 1, the visit would have preceded the discipline date and wouldn't be counted. We gave the doctor the benefit of the doubt because it was impossible to be more specific about the admission date. 

Once we cleared up the date dilemma, we began to calculate the amount of money that the state had spent on managed-care doctors through Medicare and Medicaid. 

Furthermore, Maier discovered the actual charges to Medicare and Medicaid turned out to be about 60 percent of the total cost. 

At first, the task seemed easy - a field indi- cated the charges. Then came the caveats. The field represented the total cost of the hospital visit, including the room, surgery and pay- ments to the attending and operating physi- cians and others. 

So we discounted the figures by 40 percent, and could only say that the disciplined doc- tors "oversaw" the hospital visit, explaining why the data prevented us from determining how much each doctor actually received. 

License problem 

Each procedure record also contained three licenses of doctors associated with the treat- ment, listing the licenses for the attending, operating and "other" physician. 

We chose to use only the attending and operating physicians. Still, multiple licenses for each record presented a quandary. 

It's impossible to link the two licenses one from the attending physician and one from the operating physician - to the one license field in the doctor table. 

To explain why, here's an analogy. Suppose I have a lookup table named States that trans- lates U.S. Postal state abbreviations (e.g., State.c contains "NY," "NJ," etc. into state names, and State.nam contains "New York," "New Jersey," etc.). 

Suppose I have an address book that lists someone's work address and home address, and I want to link that to the lookup table of state names. Suppose further that a friend lives in New Jersey and works in New York. 

That state code for the work address, "NY," and home address, "NJ," cannot simulta- neously point to the state code in the lookup table for state names. Ifi did, then what would the field State.name represent: New York or New Jersey? 

To resolve that dilemma, add the doctor table to the query twice by clicking twice on the "add" option in the query/show table win- dow. That adds another table called State_2. 

To use it, link the home address to the state table and the work address to the State_2 table. Now State.name is "New York" and State_2.1 is "New Jersey." 

By the way, Access doesn't really create an- other table. It merely creates another pointer to the same table. 

Richard J. Dalton Jr., can be reached by e- mail at rdalton@newsday.com 

8


HEALTH CARE 

Where to look for data 

By Maryjo Sylwester IRE and NICAR 

The Newsday series, "Managed Care and Doctors: The Broken Promise," tackled a topic that is becoming increasingly important for journalists to analyze as the health care indus- try continues to grow larger every year. Whether you're at a large or small news or- ganization, looking at health care in your com- munity is possible. There were three primary databases that Newsday used for its series: 

Hospital procedures performed at local hospitals. Use this to calculate the number of hospital visits and charges related to disciplined doctors. (Newsday and The New York Times sued to gain access to this database.) 
Doctors who have been disciplined. Each state has a regulatory agency for licensed pro- fessionals, which would be able to provide this information. (A Web site in New York lists the doctors, but it is not in database format. Newsday received this database electronically through a Freedom of Information Act re- quest.) 

There are plenty of industry sources where you can get averages or typical numbers for hospital finances, such as how much debt they have or how much money they make from outpatient versus inpatient procedures. 

A list of board-certified doctors. One place to check is the American Board of Medical Specialties, an umbrella group that represents 24 specialty boards. (www.certifieddoctor.com/ verify.html) 

Finances 

Another area of the medical industry that could be scrutinized, without requiring a great deal of resources, is finances of local hospitals or clinics. Most health care organi- zations have some sort of government regu- lation, and therefore financial reporting re- quirements. Each state should have a gov- ernment agency overseeing health care, where you could obtain a great deal of information. Some hospitals are non-profit organizations, which are required to file Form 990s. The In- ternal Revenue Service Web site (www.irs.gov) lists organizations that have filed the tax-ex- empt forms, including some basic information for each one. However, the forms are not avail- able there. 

Recently, some IRS-990s have been posted at the Guidestar site (www.guidestar.org/newsl features/990status.html) or on the National Center for Charitable Statistics site (http:// nccs.urban.org/9901). 

Other sources 

There are plenty of industry sources where you can get averages or typical numbers for hospital finances, such as how much debt they have or how much money they make from outpatient versus inpatient procedures. 

The Health Care Financing Administra- tion may be able to provide some good in- formation. Their Web site (www.hcfa.gov) has some statistical data, such as payments to hospitals and national statistics you can use for comparison purposes. 

On its Web site, the Department of Health and Human Services (www.dhhs.gov/ progorg/oig/cumsan/index.htm) has a list of people who can't take Medicare or various other federal payments for services, and other useful information. 

Before launching into a story of this type, you might also want to check the IRE Re- source Center. They have a large number of not only stories that have been done by other news organizations on health care topics, but also some tipsheets that could be useful. You can search the Resource Center database at www.ire.org/resourcecenter. 

MaryJo Sylwester can be reached by e- mail at maryjo@nicar.org 

Web sites recommended by Richard Dalton: 

The list of doctors disciplined in New York State is available at www.health.state.ny.us/ nysdoh/opmc/main.htm 

The Healthcare Association of New York State lists top state insurers on its Web site, www.hanys.org/resourcel mancare/hmotable.htm 

The American Board of Medical Specialties Web site lists the board certification of doctors at www.certifieddoctor.com/ verify.html 

9


CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

The Money Trail: Tracking Campaign Cash 

These IRE and NICAR 

workshops on using campaign finance data will be held over the next few months in various cities. More information is available at the Campaign Finance Information Center Web site, www.campaignfinance.org/ seminar.html 

Here are the dates and locations: 

Jan. 22-23: Lansing, Mich. 

Feb. 5-6: Columbus, Ohio 

Feb. 26-27: Springfield, III. 

March 4-5: Madison, Wis. 

March 25-26: Indianapolis, 

CEOs' giving habits 

Ind. 

By Richard Dunham Business Week 

In the hyper-competitive world of presi- dential campaign reporting, it's a constant challenge to stay ahead of the pack - par- ticularly if you work for a magazine that is published weekly. 

But the best way to get noticed, I've dis- covered as White House and national political correspondent for Business Week, is to create a specialized niche in the overcrowded market- place of political stories. For me, that's been the political donation habits of America's top CEOs. 

Early in the year, before the presidential can- didates filed their first disclosure forms with the Federal Election Commission, I wrote a story about the early giving habits of promi- nent business figures. This was done the old- fashioned way: a lot of phone calls to a lot of executives and to all of the campaigns. 

As the campaign heated up after Labor Day, I devised a plan to take the next step: to com- prehensively study the donation patterns of big businesses' top corporate executives. To beat the competition, we needed to do the analysis as soon as the 1999 third-quarter campaign spending reports-dt on Oct. were made public. 

Project goals 

At the start of the project, I composed a list of reporting goals: A simple scoreboard of the candidates' total number of CEO donors, an analysis of the extent to which CEOs "hedged their bets" among different candidates, a break- down of corporate givers by economic sectors (such as technology, telecommunications, en- tertainment, finance and energy) and a re- view of the 2000 donations made by CEO backers of the 1996 Clinton-Gore team. 

As a reporter with good (but not state-of- the-art) computer skills, I knew that I'd need a little bit of help to complete my analysis within days of the data becoming available. I got that assistance from Campaign for America, a nonpartisan watchdog group that enlisted two of the most knowledgeable money-in-politics experts, Kent Cooper and Tony Raymond. 

We compiled a list of the top 1,000 cor- porations by market capitalization, with their 

addresses and chief executive officers, and ar- ranged it in Excel. Cooper and Raymond checked the list against the new FEC reports and came up with more than 5,000 possible hits. We had to pare down the list by hand, elimi- nating people with identical names living in different states or people with different middle initials. Just under 600 potential donors made the cut. We "scrubbed" the data one more time to make sure we didn't confuse fathers with sons, such as "Smith Jr." with "Smith IV." Our final list had 538 contributions by CEOs. Some of these executives had donated to more than one candidate (some to as many as four White House wannabes) and some had sent multiple contributions to a single candi- date. We even found four individuals who were CEOs of two different companies, so their contributions were listed twice in our database. Again, we adjusted our totals. In the end, we found 389 contributors. 

Economic sector 

To analyze the contributions by economic sector, Business Week's Fred Jespersen sent us the magazine's computerized listing of corpo- rations coded by economic sector. This is pro- prietary data, so it can't be replicated by outsiders, but a reporter can create a reasonable facsimile by looking up each corporation in a business direc- tory like Standard & Poor's publication. 

With the sectoral data now merged in our Excel files, we rearranged our data by sector and tallied the results. 

As expected, George W. Bush had a huge lead among energy company CEOs. But he had an unexpectedly large lead over Al Gore among the Vice-President's beloved technol- ogy companies. In fact, Gore placed third be- hind Bill Bradley in techland. What's more, Bradley matched Gore in contributors among the big Hollywood CEOs. 

There are computerized lists available of anything from lawyers to bankers to profes- sional athletes. A regional reporter could pare down a list of CEOs (or bankers or lawyers) to include only those from a certain state or region. 

Richard Dunham can be reached by e-mail at richard_dunham @businessweek.com 

10


TAX CUTS 

Online tax calculator 

By Genevieve Anton 

The Colorado Springs Gazette 

Tax cuts are extremely popular among most voters, but difficult to write about in a way that hits home with your readers. These are classic pocketbook issues, yet our stories are usually heavy on numbers, bureaucratic language and political spin. Colorado had a $704 million surplus this year, a state record that prompted historic tax cuts. The question wasn't whether to cut or spend - constitutional spending limits mean surpluses must be returned to taxpay- ers - but who would get the tax breaks. When the proposed tax package emerged from the Colorado General Assembly, my statehouse colleague Michele Ames and I scrambled to make sense of it to readers. Who would be the real winners and losers if this passed? With only three days to write the first analysis for the Sunday edition, we decided to find several real people in our area, each representing a different socio-economic situ- ation, and figure out how the specific tax proposals would affect them. 

What we needed was a way to let individual taxpayers see how the proposed tax cuts would affect them directly. 

Based on information they provided about their age, marital status, taxable income and investment exclusions, we calculated their individual tax bill under the new plan. The same type of analysis was done for a small business and a large manufacturer in our area. 

We bolstered these findings by creating imaginary taxpayers and plugging their finan- cial data into algebraic formulas for each tax cut proposal to get a larger sense of how it would impact various taxpayers. 

It was a crude and tedious process, one that we desperately wanted to expand and refine. 

But there's a tight lid on information about taxpayers. The Colorado Department of Revenue said it had no reason to track cer- tain information - even on an aggregate level such as how many people currently file for certain exemptions, exclusions or deductions. 

What we needed was a way to let indi- vidual taxpayers see how the proposed tax cuts would affect them directly. 

That's when I heard about a creative ap- proach to tax coverage being tried by New Hampshire Public Radio: a Web site devoted entirely to the issue in that state. Although their Web site was a massive project that had taken months to pull together, there was one element we could copy: an online calculator that lets people see how the tax cuts affect them directly. 

Since the New Hampshire Web site hid the coding and formulas for the calculator, we had to start from scratch with little to go on. 

Fortunately, our editors loved the idea. Unfortunately, they had no clue how diffi- cult it would be and gave us only one week to pull it all together. 

Calculator creation 

In creating the calculator, we had no ex- perience or examples to follow, and not even the state's top budget or tax experts had at- tempted anything like this - although some did offer to look over our work when done. 

The idea was to give people a rough esti- mate of what they would save under each proposed tax reduction and a comparison of their final tax bill under the entire tax pack- age versus the alternative - a straight refund of the surplus. 

So we took each proposed tax cut and broke it down into an algebraic equation based on revenue formulas that ranged from one line to two pages in length. 

For example, a proposed reduction of the state income tax rate from five to 4.7 per- cent looked like this: (your taxable income .05) - (your taxable income .0475) = tax savings. 

No, we didn't make the public walk through these tortuous calculations. 

We simply figured out what information we needed to know and narrowed it down to 

Continued on page sixteen 

The Colorado Springs Gazette Web site on tax cut proposals, "It's Your Money," - including the online calculator - is available at: www.gazette.com/ yourmoney/taxcal.html 

11


PROBLEM SOLVING 

Weighting data 

Through the NICAR-L listserv you can ask questions about computer-assisted reporting, offer advice to others or simply see what's being talked about on the list. 

To join, send a message to: 

listproc@lists.missouri.edu In the message area type: SUBSCRIBE NICAR-L [your name] 

More information about the listserv is available on the NICAR Web site, www.nicar.org 

By Griff Palmer The Daily Oklahoman 

In pursuing a recent education project, The Daily Oklahoman staff writer Bobby Ross persuaded Oklahoma City schools adminis- trators to give us an electronic file contain- ing all students' addresses and school assign- ments. 

We wanted to come up with demographic indicators for the students. We explored link- ing student addresses to county assessor data, using home values as an indicator of eco- nomic status. We gave up that idea, though, after realizing that dealing with students liv- ing in apartments and rental properties would be impossible, given the limitations of the Oklahoma County assessor's data. 

We settled on using 1999 block group- level median income estimates and 1990 edu- cational attainment data from Claritas as in- dicators for students. The question of how to properly weight the data generated lots of interesting discussion on NICAR-L, NICAR's electronic mailing list for CAR practitioners. 

How we did it 

To link students up to census block groups, we first geocoded students' addresses with MapMarker software. We used Atlas GIS to assign each geocoded address to its appropriate block group. It was then a simple matter with FoxPro to write the median in- come and educational attainment data for the corresponding block group to each student's record. 

Once we had assigned a block group level median income to each student, we wanted to calculate a median for each school in the district, and here, the question of weighting came into play. At most schools, most stu- dents live in one or two block groups. Those block groups should carry more weight when calculating a school-level median than do block groups in which just a few students live. 

Using a program like SPSS, it's simple to apply a weighting factor to a variable. 

As the statisticians in The Oklahoman's marketing department explained to us, though, it's not necessary to apply a weight- ing factor to determine a weighted median if 

you have a dataset with every case in it and not grouped summaries. The weighting OC- curs naturally as medians are calculated. When ranking a set of values to determine the central value, a category (in this instance, a block group) encompassing a large num- ber of cases (students, in this instance) auto- matically carry more weight in the rankings. 

To give a simple example, say you have three cases with block group level medians assigned, and you want to calculate a me- dian from those three cases: 

1 24,586 
2 29,483 
3 32,771 

The median of the three values is 29,483. But say you have five students, three of whom live in the same block group and therefore have been assigned the same representative median income. If you rank the cases, the value that occurs more than once weights the median: 

1 24,586 
2 24,586 
3 24,586 
4 29,483 
5 32,771 

To double-check, I threw all 40,200 cases into SPSS and ran case summaries, calculat- ing the median of median incomes, grouped by schools. Then, I used FoxPro to group the 40,200 cases by school and block group. The query created a table listing, for each school, all block groups from which the school was drawing students and the number of students it was drawing. I opened the resulting table into SPSS, weighted the data by number of students in each block group, and then cal- culated the grouped median for each school. 

The results were the same both ways. 

SPSS's ability to weight grouped data by frequency is one of the many features of this program that make it a powerful tool for data analysis. Calculating weighted medians of grouped data in Excel can be done, but that's another article. 

Commercial vendors 

As we worked with our schools project, and discussed the nuances of weighting data, we also found ourselves grappling with the question of whether and how to use market- 

Continued on page twenty-one 

12


IN THE CLASSROOM 

The future of CAR 

By David Kesmodel IRE and NICAR 

When student journalists Katie Crecente and Summer Parrish got a tip last year that prices for the same drug prescriptions varied widely among pharmacies in their commu- nity, they thought they might have a story. An analysis of an Excel spreadsheet confirmed their hunch. 

The University of South Carolina students asked the pharmacies for prices on four types of drugs and built their spreadsheet in a com- puter-assisted reporting class. Crecente re- ported the story on the local cable TV sys- tem and won first place in the student com- petition for the Southern Regional Emmy Awards. 

Crecente and Parrish are not alone. Stu- dents in dozens of U.S. journalism and mass communication programs are learning to analyze information in spreadsheets and da- tabase managers, and to find the story be- hind the numbers. 

Many of the schools now teaching CAR based their approach on the program at the Missouri School of Journalism, in Columbia, Mo., which just completed its 10th year. The program has also led the way by training doz- ens of professors at boot camps offered by NICAR, a joint venture between the school and Investigative Reporters and Editors. 

The issue many journalism educators say they are now wrestling with is not whether to teach CAR skills, but how and to what degree. Increasingly, they are trying to decide whether to teach the skills in a stand-alone class, weave them into other reporting and writing classes, or do both. 

According to an informal e-mail survey of 100 accredited journalism and mass commu- nication programs for this story, educators ap- pear to be evenly split in their approaches to teaching CAR One half of the 64 respondents said they offered a stand-alone CAR class, al- though some do not offer the class every se- mester. 

Of the 32 programs that don't teach a stand- alone CAR class, 25 said the skills are taught in other courses. And most of the schools that offer a freestanding class say they also try to integrate the skills throughout the curriculum. 

Steve Doig, the Knight Chair at Arizona 

State University's Cronkite School of Jour- nalism and Telecommunication, said the goal of trying to teach all journalism students ba- sic CAR skills is difficult to achieve, particu- larly in large schools like his. "I have 15 stu- dents each semester in my (CAR) class, 30 in a year," he said. "There are 1,400 students in the Cronkite school. I can't teach them all." 

Doig said the school is tinkering with ways to circulate CAR throughout the curriculum. His current tactics include introducing stu- dents to online resources in his basic news writing class and presenting guest lectures on CAR in his colleagues' classes. 

The classes 

The names that are given to stand-alone CAR classes vary, including precision jour- nalism or computer-assisted reporting. Some schools spend a lot of time teaching online research skills, while others concentrate on spreadsheets and database managers. 

At the Missouri School of Journalism, CAR is taught in a stand-alone class and in- corporated into an investigative reporting class taught by Brant Houston, executive di- rector of IRE and NICAR. 

"Part of our mission here is to make sure this tool is blended into good reporting," said Houston, author of the textbook, "Com- puter-Assisted Reporting: A Practical Guide." 

One of his students, Mark Greenblatt, used National Bridge Inventory data to re- port on failing bridges in Missouri. (see Greenblatt's story on page fifteen.) 

For the stand-alone class, Jo Craven trains students to use Microsoft Excel and Access and to negotiate for data from government agencies. In addition to weekly lessons, stu- dents work on two semester-long projects. 

Craven wants students to take away from her class the ability to logically go about their reporting, whether the story involves a dataset or not. "I want them to learn to respond to those bells in their head that say, 'Something here is not right.' The worst thing they can do as reporters is have a funny feeling and not follow up on it," she said. 

One of her students, Charles Choi, re- cently built a spreadsheet of data on check fraud in Columbia and wrote a front-page 

Tipsheets on CAR in the classroom, available from the IRE Resource Center: Tipsheet #885, "Checklist of spreadsheet skills," by Jeff South of Virginia Commonwealth University, for the 1999 National Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference. Tipsheet provides a checklist of CAR skills to help students gauge what they've learned (or have to learn) and to make sure instructors cover the basics with each class. Other lists can be found at: http:// saturn.vcu.edul-jcsouth/ carsklls/skillindx.html 

Tipsheet #886, "Graduate seminar in research syllabus," by Teresa Allen, Boston University, for the 1999 National CAR Conference. Syllabus is provided for a class designed to help students locate and obtain public documentary information, how to read for newsworthy facts and how to cull facts into powerful news stories. 

Continued on page fourteen 

13


Continued from page thirteen: CAR classroom 

"Computer-Assisted Reporting: Practical Guide," by Brant Houston. It can be ordered from IRE and NICAR for $25 for IRE members or $30 for non- members plus shipping. Call (573) 882-2042 to order. 

IRE and NICAR can bring specialized training into newsrooms, including the necessary equipment and useful handouts. 

Costs vary depending on the number of people trained and the difficulty in developing training materials. Contact Trainer Tom McGinty at tmcginty@nicar.org or (573) 882-3320 or Executive Director Brant Houston at brant@ire.org or (573) 882-2042. 

story for the Columbia Missourian. Choi said journalism schools with stand- alone CAR classes are giving aspiring jour- nalists more reasons to get a degree in jour- nalism, as opposed to a liberal arts degree. 

"This makes journalism school more im- portant," he said. "Not everybody needs a V-8 engine, but it's really nice." 

Factors 

A lot of factors affect a school's approach to teaching CAR, including faculty members' philosophical views about the subject, whether adequate resources are available, and whether faculty members are qualified to teach CAR 

The bulk of the accredited programs of- fering a stand-alone CAR class teach it as an elective, because under the accreditation rules, students must take about three-fourths of their classes outside their major, and the schools can offer only so many core journal- ism classes. 

"Teaching CAR as a separate class perpetuates the illusion that computer competence is an isolated and esoteric specialty accessible only to a few," Philip Meyer said. 

Accreditation has influenced the deci- sion of the journalism department at Washington and Lee University not to of- fer a freestanding CAR class, said Ham Smith, department head. 

"In the highly restricted accredited cur- riculum, it does not seem wise to require a CAR course," he said. 

Meanwhile, he argued, teaching CAR as an elective is problematic. 

"Isolating CAR in a non-required course unfairly limits the number of students knowl- edgeable" in CAR, he said, "so we dribble it out everywhere as a standard reporting ac- tivity." 

Philip Meyer, a professor of journalism at the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill and a pioneer in using computers to enhance reporting, feels strongly that his school should not offer a stand-alone CAR class. At UNC, the skills are taught in other classes. 

"Teaching CAR as a separate class per- petuates the illusion that computer compe- tence is an isolated and esoteric specialty ac- cessible only to a few," Meyer said. 

Virginia Commonwealth University also has subscribed to the theory that CAR should not be taught as a separate class, said Jeff South, an associate professor in the School of Mass Communications. 

But what South and some other educa- tors say they have discovered is that when you don't teach a specialized class in CAR and depend on faculty members to integrate the skills in other courses, the job doesn't al- ways get done. 

"When everyone is responsible for CAR, it can turn out that no one is responsible for CAR," South said. At VCU, he said, "some faculty members did not have adequate CAR training and did not feel comfortable teach- ing CAR.' 

Now, the school is looking into requiring a course in information gathering, which would introduce students to online resources and perhaps to spreadsheets and database managers. 

With time, say many educators, stand- alone classes will be phased out as CAR be- comes a more routine reporting tool. Schools may teach advanced classes in CAR, but more and more students won't blink when handed data in a spreadsheet. 

"Hopefully the concept of using a spread- sheet and going online will become so in- grained that treating it as a separate weird specialty will no longer be important," Doig said. 

David Kesmodel can be reached by e-mail at david@nicar.org 

14


FIRST VENTURE 

Troubled bridges 

By Mark Greenblatt University of Missouri 

I wanted to find an easy database to work with for my first computer-assisted story. I had taken a CAR course at the University of Missouri-Columbia earlier, but had put off applying what learned. My only goals were to use the CAR skills I learned and also to play around a little bit with my brand new computer. 

Since bridges have always fascinated me, I thought I'd take a look at the conditions of the ones in my area for a project in an inves- tigative reporting class, taught by IRE and NICAR Executive Director Brant Houston. 

I wanted to play it safe the first time and avoid getting a database with dirty data, so I obtained my copy of the bridges inspection database for Missouri directly from NICAR. I had no idea what I was about to get myself into. 

It turned out we could only use the database as a tipsheet to finding bridges of interest, and also to find the bigger picture. 

Three months later, the story I uncovered would have Missouri lawmakers calling for quick reform. The state of the bridges in our area turned out to be in dismal shape. 

Starting out 

KOMU TV's news director Stacey Woelfel and I originally thought we could do a quick story to see if any bridges open to traffic in Columbia and around our viewing area were in bad shape. We had heard ru- mors of bad bridges but had nothing nailed down. It would be easy, I thought, to sim- ply run a few queries on the database, come up with a list of the worst bridges, and broad- cast the story after confirming a few facts with local bridge inspectors. I couldn't have been 

more wrong, and that turned out to be good. 

Just learning about the database took me a couple weeks of playing around on my spare time. The record layout of the National Bridge Inventory was more than 100 pages long, and it included a lot very technical terms like sufficiency rating formulas, struc- ture numbers and deck geometry. 

The sufficiency rating is a computer-gen- erated formula that is supposed to represent each bridge's overall condition. I ran differ- ent queries showing the bridges in mid-Mis- souri with the lowest sufficiency ratings. With that list in hand, I contacted a local bridge inspector with the Missouri Department of Transportation to learn more. 

He immediately told me that using suffi- ciency ratings was the wrong way to do this study. The only way to look at bridges is to look directly at the safety ratings for their sub- structures, superstructures and decks, he said. He took me out on bridge inspections for a day to teach me about his job. 

By the end of the day, I had determined there was no accurate way we could use the numbers in the National Bridge Inventory to point us towards any list of the 10 worst bridges in mid-Missouri. It turned out we could only use the database as a tipsheet to finding bridges of interest, and also to find the bigger picture. 

New direction 

I went back to my computer and started running more queries. I ranked the mid- Missouri bridges with the worst substructures and the worst decks, and for the first time grew concerned about the sheer numbers of bridges in bad shape in our area. Far too many bridges were rated in poor condition, and many of them carried thousands of cars a day on major highways. 

After examining the written records of countless bridges to match them with the computer data for accuracy, I noticed a com- mon trait. All the bridges the computer data pointed to as in bad shape were all deter- mined to be structurally deficient. That means they can't carry the legal loads they were designed to hold. 

A query we ran showed that close to one- third of the 3,000 bridges in mid-Missouri 

Other stories using the National Bridge Inventory database, available from the IRE Resource Center, include: 

"Tennessee Bridges," (story #15293) by WSMV- TV in Nashville, Tenn., 1998. 

Continued on page sixteen 

"Bridges on the Brink," (story #12972) by the Rochester Post-Bulletin, Rochester, Minn., 1994. Contact the Resource Center at (573) 882-3364 to order. 

15


Bridges 

Continued from page fifteen: 

The National Bridge Inventory database, 1994- 1998, is available from the NICAR data library either for the entire United States or for an individual state. Prices vary depending on news organization size. 

More information is available on the NICAR Web site at www.nicar.org 

were in that bad shape. The break in this story came when the computer data pointed us towards one bridge that seemed like it should be closed based on its ratings. The written report said the bridge was in "exceptional" condition. 

To order, call the data library at (573) 884-7711. 

It turned out the Missouri Department of Transportation keeps a list of 19 bridges in mid-Missouri that are "exceptionally" de- ficient, yet still open to traffic. One of a few inside sources I had developed anonymously passed that list on to KOMU. 

The list was remarkably frightening. It showed the Missouri Department of Trans- portation knew the bridges in mid-Missouri were falling apart in some cases, but it had no immediate plans to fix them. One bridge we focused on was described as having "con- crete periodically falling into traffic lanes" on Interstate 70. 

We queried the database again, and found out it would take 49 years to fix all the bridges that needed repairs in mid-Missouri at the 

rate the state was going. The problem was, state officials told us the average lifespan of a bridge is only 50 years. In the end, the computer database we used added depth to the story and made it pos- sible to more quickly uncover larger, specific problems. After the story aired, the Speaker of the House of the Missouri House of Represen- tatives requested a copy of the story to use in the Legislature to push for reform. Other lawmakers also called, and an internal MoDOT e-mail was forwarded to me that showed MoDOT was "putting everything else on the backburner" for a while to exam- ine what they can do about their bridges in mid-Missouri. I think it's safe to say I'm hooked on CAR after doing this project. I can't wait to get ahold of another set of data. 

Mark Greenblatt can be reached by e-mail at mpg680@mizzou.edu 

Continued from page eleven: Tax calculator 

10 basic questions such as: What's your tax- able income, are you married, and what's your investment income from interest, dividends or capital gains? 

You then assign a value to each answer, which is used behind the scenes in your calculator's mathematical formulas. The re- sult popped up in a separate, easy-to-under- stand format that basically said, "Here's how much you'll save on each of these propos- als." 

To see how this works, you can visit the real thing at www.gazette.com/yourmoney/ taxcal. html 

Testing it out 

Once you've put together the formulas (by yourself or with help from someone who understands both mathematics and the policy involved,) you'll probably need help trans- lating it into computer-speak for the Web site. Each server may recognize a different language, but we used Java Script. We found a computer programmer to help us for a small 

fee (once you write out the formulas it's pretty straightforward work for those who know how.) 

Once it's on the site, you must run tests over and over using different scenarios and compare it to your own calculations on pa- per to make sure it works. 

We found numbers with too many deci- mals or result boxes that turned up blank or simply outrageous results like millions in tax savings for a poor, single mother. If it doesn't work, you'll have to go over the formula step- by-step to find the problem and rewrite the calculation. 

Believe it or not, we met our deadline, and more than 500 readers visited the site in the first week to look at proposed tax cuts and try out the on-line tax calculator. Feed- back forms also helped generate great stories and new ways of thinking about how we could cover the tax debate in the future. 

Genevieve Anton can be reached by e- mail at ganton@iex.net 

16


Race tabulations Continued from page one: 

want to look at racial and ethnic changes since 1990. In both 1980 and 1990, the Census (and the federal government at large) officially rec- ognized five racial groupings: White, Black, American Indian, Asian or Pacific Islander and Other Race. Respondents could pick only one of those choices. Notice that "Hispanic" is not one of the choices, because "Hispanic" is not a race. Instead, the Census had a separate question asking respondents if they were "of Spanish/ Hispanic origin." The result of both the race and Hispanic-origin questions is that a per- son could be counted as one of a total of 10 possibilities (discounting the various subcat- egories). 

OMB ruling 

However, this relatively tidy state of af- fairs has changed dramatically for the 2000 Census. The reason is a 1997 ruling by the federal Office of Management and Budget (OMB) that the Census Bureau and other federal data collectors must start allowing respondents to pick more than one racial cat- egory if they wish. The ruling also split the 1990 "Asian or Pacific Islander" racial cat- egory into two new categories: "Asian" and "Native Hawaiian and other Pacific Islander." 

The OMB ruling is a good thing in many ways. It certainly reflects the social reality of this increasingly diverse country better than the old one-race-only choice. It stops forc- ing people to declare only one part of their heritage. And it will make a much richer source of data for research and stories. 

But this change also creates a potentially huge problem for those of us who want to compare race/ethnicity in 2000 with 1990 and earlier. The fact that respondents can pick more than one category means there are a total of 63 possible categories of races alone or in various combinations, ranging from "White alone" to "White, Black, American Indian, Asian, Pacific Islander and Other Race." (Anyone you can find from this cat- egory probably is worth a human-interest story in their own right!) And you need to double that number to account for whether respondents are of Hispanic origin or not. 

The 2000 Census initial data release, the 

PL94-171 reapportionment data, will col- lapse these 126 possibilities into a somewhat less cumbersome array of summary tables. Looking just at 2000 data, these tables will give journalists and researchers a good pic- ture of where each group stands in relation to the others. But there is no table that is truly comparable to the 1990 ten-category table because the 2000 tables include a brand- new category: "Two or more races." 

Nor can the "two or more races category" simply be ignored, except perhaps in parts of the country where the population is over- whelmingly white. The 1998 dress rehearsal conducted in parts of California, South Caro- lina and Wisconsin found that up to five percent of the respondents (in Sacramento) chose two or more races. 

This means it will be up to the data users like us to choose an appropriate algorithm to transform the publicly-available 2000 tabulations into something we can use to do comparisons with 1990 data. 

One way the 2000 Census deals with the multiple race category is to create a series of tables giving the count of "Race X alone or in combination with one or more other races." Such tables are created for each of the major race categories. 

But you can't simply build a 10-category table comparable to 1990 using these. The reason is double counting. A person who claims White and Black ancestry will be counted both in the White table and in the Black table. 

I tested this method with the Dress Re- hearsal data for Sacramento and found that 

"United States Census 2000," (#938), by Steve Doig and Peter Bounpane, Arizona State University, for the 1999 National Computer-Assiste Reporting Conference.This tipsheet includes four handouts on potential shortcomings of the census, the U.S. Bureau of the Census' official plan, and data products that will be available. 

Continued on page eighteen 

"Data analysis and census data," (#945), by Jennifer LaFleur, formerly of the San Jose Mercury News, and Philip Meyer, of the University of North Carolina-Chapel Hill for the 1999 CAR Conference. The tipsheet contains analysis tools for working with the census data. 

17


Census 2000 

Census glossary (From handout #809, by Paul Overberg of USA Today): 

total, 20 to the non-Latin Black total, and so forth. 

some tracts produced population totals as much as 16 percent greater than in reality. 

NRFU: Non-response follow-up. If you don't mail back your census form, a live human comes to interview you. Or eventually, your neighbors, if you can't be found. 

Possible methods 

ICM: Integrated Coverage Measurement. A national survey of 750,000 households that will be done just after and matched to the census, duplicating its core in miniature. It will be used to double-check the accuracy of the data and, Congress willing, to adjust totals. 

This approach is attractive for at least a couple of reasons. It uses mutually exclusive categories that produce a total population equal to the actual count. And it can be done with relative ease on a spreadsheet or with program- ming. 

The demographics experts at the Census Bureau are well aware of the implications of this change and are wrestling with ways to make the data the most useful. Some of the possible methods require access to individual respondent records, which because of the confidentiality requirement is something that only the Bureau itself has. For instance, the "equal fractions" method involves splitting multiple-race respondents into their compo- nents, so to speak. Thus, a respondent who lists himself as "White" and "Asian" would add one-half a person to the White tally and one-half a person to the Asian tally. 

CCC: Complete Count Committee. Local advisory groups assembled to get the word out and cue the Census Bureau to local circumstances. 

Such a retabulation using individual record access may be done by the Bureau at some point during the data release cycle. But it appears as if the first major data release, the PL94-171 data, won't include a retabulation. This means it will be up to the data users like us to choose an appropriate algorithm to transform the publicly-available 2000 tabulations into something we can use to do comparisons with 1990 data. 

Luckily, prime time still is a year away - the first real data won't appear until early in 2001. 

However, it raises the likelihood of creat- ing "fictional" respondents. In the example above, it may be that all of the 100 multiple- race respondents actually listed themselves as non-Latin "Asian and White." In that case, this method would have created 20 Black respon- dents who don't actually exist. 

Some retabulation methods can be applied by non-Bureau researchers. One such method (called "proportional distribution") involves spreading the "two or more races" tally among the major single race/ethnic categories based on each of those categories' share of the total. For instance, assume that a census tract had 100 multiple-race respondents, and that the rest of the tract's population was 60 percent non-Latin White, 20 percent non-Latin Black, 10 percent non-Latin Asian and 10 percent Latin White. Under the proportional distri- bution plan, 60 of the multiple-race respon- dents would be added to the non-Latin White 

Another objection to this method is that it arguably overweights the White category at the expense of the minority races. A primary rea- son for redoing the tabulations into a format compatible with 1990 is so that changes in racial segregation and employment opportu- nity can be measured. Under most anti-dis- crimination laws, a person would be counted as a minority eligible for protections and pref- erences if one parent was a minority and the other parent was White. 

By that standard, all the multiple-race re- spondents should be distributed among the minority race categories, yet the proportional method will put most of them in the White category. Nor can you solve it by simply tak- ing non-Latin White out of the proportional- ity formula; if so, then you typically wind up with too-high counts for one of the minority categories. 

I've played with yet another approach, assign- ing different parts of the 2000 tabulations to each of the 1990 categories. My still-in-development method seems to allocate the multiple-race respon- dents pretty well. But it doesn't produce a total population equal to the actual count (although it usually comes quite close.) So my method, too, needs some more study before it's ready for prime time. 

Luckily, prime time still is a year away - the first real data won't appear until early in 2001. Until then, other census reporters and and the real experts at the Census Bureau-will continue chewing on this problem. 

So the best advice I have now is, "Stay tuned!" Steve Doig can be reached by e-mail at steve.doig@asu.edu 

18


TECH TIP Parsing nightmare 

By MaryJo Sylwester IRE and NICAR 

Many times there is more than one solu- tion to a problem - as Robert Gebeloff dis- covered in late November when faced with an unusual parsing dilemma. His post to the NICAR-L thread elicited about eight different solutions. Here's the problem: a state agency had grudgingly turned over some data in ASCII, delimited with semicolons, with each record ending in the person's name. The big prob- lem, though, was that there wasn't a delim- iter between records. Here's a sample: GRADY,SELMA ;8M MIGLIORE MANOR ;ELIZABETH;NJ;07206-64; NB00010500; Z;99;19340127;SELMA GRADY Gebeloff wanted to know if there was a way to construct a search/replace that would recognize the name reversal at the end of the record and insert some kind of delimiter. Here's a few of the suggestions, including the ultimate solution Gebeloff used: 

Suggestion one: 

Matthew Ericson, of The Philadelphia In- quirer, suggested using Perl to construct a search-and-replace expression that will put a line break after each record: perl -p-e's/((.+?),(.+?)\s*;+?)\3 \2\s*/\1\n/g;"datafile.txt More information about Perl is available www.perl.com 

Suggestion two: 

Paul Skolnick, of Thunder & Lightning News Service in Belleair Bluffs, Fla., sug- gested this solution: run the text file through a macro in a (newer version) word-processing program to parse the name fields. Since the first and last words in the records are the same, you would in- sert a carriage return-line feed after the sec- ond appearance and set that off as one dis- tinct record. The macro recorder in Word 2000 is in the Tools menu. It has a Record function in it, but you would have to doctor the recorded macro some. 

Suggestion three: 

Offered by David Heath, of The Seattle 

Times, this solution preserves the original data, so commas before first and middle names are kept. This program takes bits of the file to work with at a time, which requires more code, but ultimately makes the program run faster. 

Declare variables, including an array for the nine fields. Dim intReadFile, intWriteFile As Integer Dim strLine, strTempLine As String Dim strField(1 To 9) As String Dim X, ctr As Integer Dim lngCheckName, lngLengthOffields As Long 

Open the text file and the output file intReadFile = FreeFile Open "d:\data\parse\newhha1.txt" For Input As #intReadFile intWriteFile = FreeFile Open "d:\data\parse\output.txt" For Output As #intWriteFile 

Print the field names in the first line of the output file Print #intWriteFile, "Name" + "Address" + + "State" "," + "ZipCode" + "LicenseNo" "Code" + + "Expires" Start a loop to read the text file. In actuality, it will loop only once. Do While Not EOF(intReadFile) Stuff the whole file into a variable "strLine" Line Input #intReadFile, strLine 

Start a second loop to read smaller chunks of the file This program is made more complicated by efforts to speed up the processing. It obviates the need to resave the whole file into memory after parsing each field. Do While Len(strLine) > 0 Initialize the counters 1 ctr = ctr + 1 lngLengthOffields = 0 

Cut a chunk of 5000 bytes off the file and manipulate it. This makes the program run much faster. strTempLine = Mid(strLine, 1, 5000) 

Feed the nine fields into an array, using semi-colons as the delimiter For X = 1 To 9 

A couple of interesting new sites to check out: 

Continued on page twenty 

Guide to Statistical Resources: www.mnsfld.edu/ depts/lib/govstats.html The ten individual Web pages that make up the Guide to Statistical Resources list hundreds of print reference works, government documents, and other materials that provide numeric data. In many cases, online or CD- ROM versions are also available. Links to specific Web locations are given whenever possible. 

StatBase (United Kingdom): www.statistics.gov.uk/ statbase/mainmenu.asp 

Many datasets may be downloaded. StatBase has been set up to provide access to a comprehensive set of key statistics drawn from the whole range of official United Kingdom government datasets. 

19


NICAR data library: 

The Federal Aviation Administration's Enforcements database is now updated through Sept. 1999. 

The database includes enforcement actions against airlines, pilots, cargo carriers, foreign airlines traveling in the U.S., mechanics and other aviation personnel. 

More information, 

including sample slices of the data, is available on the NICAR Web site, www.nicar.org/data/faae 

Cost is $50 for small news organizations, $70 for 50,000 to 100,000 circulation (25-50 market) and $90 for large news organizations. 

To order, call the data library at (573) 884- 7711. 

Continued from page nineteen: Parsing 

If Position0fSemiColon(strTempLine) = 0 Then Exit Do strField(x) = Mid(strTempLine, 1, Position0fSemiColon(strTempLine) 1) strTempLine = TruncateLine(strTempLine) lngLengthOffields = lngLengthOffields + Len(strField(x)) + 1 Next X 

Cut off the start of the file already fed into the array strLine = LTrim(Mid(strLine, lngLengthOffields + 1)) 

Measure the length of the extraneous data and cut it out of the next record If ctr = 1 Then lngCheckName = en(strField(1)) If ctr > 1 Then strField(1) = LTrim(Mid(strField(1), lngCheckName)) IngCheckName =Len(strField(1)) = End If 

Write the data to a comma-delimited file Write #intWriteFile, LTrim(strField(1)), LTrim(strField(2)), strField(3), strField(4), strField(5), strField(6), strField(7), strField(8) Loop Loop 

Close the input and output files Close Notify the user when the program is done retval = MsgBox("All Done", vbOKOnly, "Go Home") End End Sub 

Create a function to locate semi-colons Private Function Position0fSemiColon(String1 As String) Position0fSemiColon InStr(1, String1, ";", vbTextCompare) End Function 

Create a function to cut data from the file once read Private Function TruncateLine(String1 As String) TruncateLine = Mid(String1, Position0fSemiColon(String1) End Function 

Solution: 

A Visual Basic script, drafted by Tim Henderson, of The Miami Herald, and modi- 

fied slightly by Gebeloff, creates a text file and nine variables. 

It then creates a loop that goes through the data looking for field delimiters. The contents of the first nine fields are assigned to the variables, and then it stacks the next nine records underneath, and so on until it runs out of data. The result is theoretically a tab-delimited text file that has line breaks after each record. 

Gebeloff discovered, however, that his software didn't recognize tabs, so he changed the script to insert a comma between fields in the new table. 

He also had to swap in commas for semi- colons, which meant getting rid of extrane- ous commas in the original data. The script (run from Word's V Editor): 

Sub ParseDelimited() variables for the two text files we need Dim outfile As Integer Dim infile As Integer 

variables for the fields we create Dim add As String, city As String, st As String, zip As String, licno As String, code As String, expires As String, dob As String, name As String 

Open the file to receive the parsed fields outfile = FreeFile Open "c:\temp\hhc2.txt" For Output As outfile Open the original datafile infile = FreeFile Open "c:\temp\healthaides\hhc2.txt" For Input As infile 

Loop through the file inputting the variables Do While Not EOF(infile) Input #infile, add, city, st, zip, licno, code, expires, dob, name Each time you get all 9 fields put them in the new file separated by commas Print #outfile, add & "," & city & & st & "," & zip & & licno & "," & code & "," & expires & "," & dob & "," & name Loop Clean up Close #infile Close #outfile End Sub MaryJo Sylwester can be reached by e- mail at maryjo@nicar.org 

20


Continued from page twenty: Weighting 

ing data from a commercial vendor. 

Experienced CAR practitioners approach commercial data with cautious skepticism. After deciding to use census block group median household income as an indicator of students' economic status, we were faced with a choice: use the by-now-badly-outdated 1990 census data, or use updated estimates from a commercial data vendor. After giving it a good bit of thought, and weighing comments offered up on NICAR- L, we opted to use 1999 estimates from Claritas. Whenever the subject comes up on NICAR-L, the comments offered are thought-provoking. The Miami Herald's Tim Henderson views commercial data with a jaundiced eye. Tim points out that annual estimates put out by commercial marketing data firms are just that: estimates. He further points out that the commercial firms, for competitive rea- sons, don't like to share a lot of information about how they arrive at their estimates. 

Overall, we believe the data we're using is allowing us to measure what we set out to measure. 

The fact that estimates are being drawn using vague methods should be enough to give sober journalists pause. But then, so should using 1990 census data to try to talk about the characteristics of our community in 1999. 

On one point there is strong agreement among most who have weighed in on the topic on NICAR-L: it would be risky, in- deed, to use annual estimates, whether from the U.S. Census Bureau's Current Popula- tion Survey or from commercial vendors, to try to measure changes over time at the lo- cal level and more dangerous still to try to use such data to measure year-to-year changes at the tract level. 

Using small-area data to compare differ- ent parts of your community within the same year is a different matter than using the data to try to measure changes over time (though the rationale for using 1999 Claritas estimates - the assumption that it is more up-to-date - presumes that the commercial source has made some sort of reasonably accurate as- sessment of changes over time). 

Use with caution 

A consensus emerges among many NICARians as to how to handle the use of commercial data (and these principles apply more broadly, to data other than commer- cial products): tell your readers/viewers as completely as possible what data you're us- ing, how you're using it, and what its limita- tions are. Look for other sources of data to either corroborate or question the commer- cial data. 

This is the approach we're following at The Oklahoman as we use this data. We've cross- referenced Claritas' block group household income data, aggregated to the school level, with school-level free and reduced-price lunch figures, and we've found a rough, if imperfect correlation. As the median income figure for a school goes down, the percent- age of students receiving free and reduced- price lunches tends to go up. 

In instances where the techniques we're using show obvious weakness, we're point- ing out those weaknesses to our readers. 

Overall, we believe the data we're using is allowing us to measure what we set out to measure. Even though it's imperfect, it's al- lowed us to take a deeper, more meaningful look at the story than we could without the data. 

As Steve Doig, Knight Chair in Journal- ism at Arizona State University points out, before too long we'll have a solid benchmark against which to compare the data we're now using: the 2000 census. 

"I think a really interesting story to be done shortly after the 2000 data is released will be a comparison of how closely the vari- ous vendors were to reality," Doig says. 

Griff Palmer can be reached by e-mail at gpalmer@oklahoman.com 

The MAUDE dataset is available from the NICAR data library, with records updated to March 1999, for the entire United States. 

Cost is $100 for small news organizations, $125 for the 25-50 market and 50,000 to 100,000 circulation and $150 for large news organizations. 

To order call (573) 884- 7711. 

A sample slice of MAUDE is NICAR Web site at www.nicar.org/data/maude 

21


Continued from page one: Religion 

Coming soon The next issue of Uplink will be published in March. It will include stories about journalists outside the United States using CAR for projects and everyday assignments. 

erything from the annual Muslim fast of Ramadan to the plight of the Chinese medi- tation movement Falun Gong. 

I also subscribe to e-mail lists from many of the major religious groups I cover. If you look around the major religious sites on the Web, you'll find places where you can sign up to receive almost daily e-mails from places as diverse as the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America, the National Council of the Churches of Christ, the Council on Ameri- can-Islamic Relations, informal neo-pagan networks and even the supporters of impris- oned Falun Gong activists. Many of these e- mails are quickly dispatched to my "trash" folder each morning - but a quick scan of the dozens of "subject lines" I find in my inbox often sparks a future story idea. 

CD-ROMs 

I use a variety of religion-related CD- ROMs I've collected over the past five years. My CD-ROM library includes a tour of the Vatican, a guide to holy places in the Middle East, a scholarly Bible dictionary, a history of the Holocaust, a text of the Dead Sea Scrolls and a collection of Jewish reference books. These titles tend to be released by publishers and then quickly go out of print, so watch for the release of helpful CDs and snap them up as soon as they go on sale. 

I use a variety of databases to quickly organize and search the gargantuan amounts of information that flow from the world of religion. 

One excellent CD-ROM to consider is "On Common Ground: World Religions in America" by Columbia University Press, an in-depth look at many faiths by Harvard University's Pluralism Project. And, because writing about religion often involves refer- 

ences to history and traditional culture, it's very useful to keep a simple copy of an Encarta encyclopedia handy. 

The most basic software for religion writ- ers is a searchable Bible to quickly find key references that may crop up in stories on deadline. But remember that English trans- lations vary widely and you'll probably want at least a King James Version as well as a more modern English version. I have four sets of Bible software on my PC and use the "New Oxford Annotated Bible" most frequently. 

Databases 

I use a variety of databases to quickly or- ganize and search the gargantuan amounts of information that flow from the world of religion. 

MS Access is excellent for building cus- tomized databases. For example, the Access database I've created on members of the Col- lege of Cardinals - the group from which the Catholic church selects its popes - lets me track this influential group season after sea- son. (see sidebar on page 23) 

I also use askSam-brand SurfSaver soft- ware on the Internet, which allows me to save key Web pages in categorized folders on my PC. Later, I can search the entire text of these voluminous holdings. 

I use MS Word to create a crude but amaz- ingly effective database out of reams of elec- tronic data I've received about religion. I save important wire stories, significant e-mail press releases and other similar information by copy- ing/pasting these texts into 10 ongoing Word files I have created. They represent categories, such as, "Catholic," "Politics and Religion" and "Islam." As an individual file reaches about 1.5 MB, I archive it onto a Zip disk and create a new file. When I'm reporting and want to pin- point a particular story or document, I simply open up the appropriate Word file and use the Edit/Find function to search for key words. 

E-mail 

Because reporting on religion almost always involves an attempt to connect news with the lives of ordinary people, I use e-mail as a life- line to keep in touch with people I've encoun- tered over the years. 

I also maintain specialized lists of people Continued on page twenty-three 

22


Continued from page twenty-two: Religion 

by category related to my beat. For example, when the Catholic hierarchy is considering a change in church rules that might affect lo- cal parishes, I will fire off a quick e-mail to my list of Catholics and ask whether they know of anyone especially concerned about such a change. People who e-mail me with an intelligent comment - readers, academ- ics, clergy and others - are potential future sources. I save their e-mail addresses and may 

include them in the lists I'm building. Ultimately, covering religion at the turn of the millennium is like covering presiden- tial politics - if there were 1,000 parties field- ing candidates. The subject can be over- whelming, unless journalists use all the avail- able RAM at their disposal. David Crumm can be reached by e-mail at crumm@freepress.com 



ON THE BEAT:
Predicting next Pope
By David Crumm	nals: their names, birthdates, countries of ori-
Detroit Free Press	gin, current assignments, etc. Building the da-
Since the current pontiff, Pope John Paul	tabase took several full days of painstaking
II, is 79 and in poor health, many Catholics	work, because the information was available
are concerned about the identity of his pos-	only in a printed format - and had to be ex-
sible successors. What kind of man will emerge	tracted from a series of annual almanacs. In
as the next worldwide leader of the Catholic	this case, I could not directly import electronic
Church?	data.
That's what the Free Press hoped to explore	I wound up with more than a dozen cat-
in an in-depth examination of leading papal	egories of data about each man - including a
candidates.	category to identify those cardinals in our da-
The problem is that, if John Paul died to-	tabase who had played a role in the church
morrow, there would be 107 qualified candi-	since the 1978 conclave, but who had died.
dates: all of the current cardinals under age 80.	Immediately, we were able to identify 107
Beyond interviewing Vatican-watchers,	men as eligible for election - as of our publica-
church scholars and our local cardinal, we	tion date. Looking deeper into the data, we
wanted to offer our own analysis of the cur-	found that, since John Paul's election, he has
rent College of Cardinals. The first question	thinned the ranks of Italian cardinals from 23
was the most basic: exactly how many cardi-	to 17 - and has spread a few of those votes to
nals were under age 80 and thus were eligible	new cardinals from Africa and the United
candidates?	States.
Beyond that, we wanted to know more	We also determined that John Paul has per-
about the background of the cardinals. For	sonally appointed nearly 90 percent of the cur-
instance, could another non-Italian be elected	rent College of Cardinals, an indication that
to follow John Paul? How heavily were various	most of the candidates tend to agree with the
countries and continents represented in the	current pope on major issues.
current group?	The database was the key to writing our
To resolve these questions - and to be able	story with authority and specificity about the
to accurately track the exact makeup of the Col-	numbers - and, overall, to pushing our analy-
lege of Cardinals in future stories - I created	sis of the candidates to a higher level.
an MS Access 97 database of all current cardi-	The valuable bonus in this case is that, as
nals. To provide a comparison with the makeup	we continue to follow the issue of papal transi-
of the college that elected John Paul II, I also	tion, we can quickly check in on the accurate
built a database of all cardinals involved in the	list of candidates at any point in the future.
1978 conclave.	David Crumm can be reached by e-mail
I collected data on more than 200 cardi-	at crumm@freepress.com



Here are just a few religion Web sites from Shawn McIntosh's beat page (www.reporter.org/ beat/religion.html): 

Christian Coalition: www.cc.org/ 

Covenant Baptist Church -Texas: http://Covenant Baptist.org/ 

Religion News Links (Zondervan Publishing House): www.zondervan.com/ newslink.htm 

Nation of Islam Online: www.noi.org/ 

Internet for Christians: www.gospelcom.net/ifel 

The Islamic Herald: www.ais.org/~bsb/Herald/ links.html 

23


Bits, Bytes and Barks 

Uplink survey 

Thank you to everyone who took the time to answer our survey on the NICAR Web site during the fall. We've com- piled the results and will use them to provide content that better suits your needs. 

Overall, we found Uplink has a wide range of readers in terms of skill levels. At least from the survey (which, of course, isn't statistically valid), our readership appears to consist of an equal mix of those who consider themselves beginner, inter- mediate and advanced. 

The biggest finding of the survey was that readers of all skill levels want more technical stories - with specific "how- to" examples. This is something we're going to address im- mediately, and I hope you'll see gradual improvements in this area in the coming issues. And keep in mind that you can help by offering to share your solution to a tough technical problem. Eventually, somebody else may offer a solution that would help you as well. 

We're also working to incorporate more information per- tinent to small news organizations - since doing CAR with limited resources is very different. 

As always, we encourage you to share the results of your work, no matter how large of a news organization you work at or whether it's print or broadcast. Your examples and tales (of both success and failure) can help others learn. 

Contact me at maryjo@nicar.org or by phone at (573) 884-7711 if you have story ideas or questions/comments about the content of Uplink. 

-MaryJo Sylwester 

NICAR data library 

The boat registration dataset has been updated through June 30, 1999. This database, the U.S. Coast Guard's Marine Safety Information System, contains information on com- mercial and recreational vessels. 

It can be used mainly to find out information about a specific boat or ship, such as finding the owner. Reporters have used this dataset when a shipping accident occurs or to find out information about U.S. Coast Guard boats. 

There is documentation for 265,584 vessels registered with the Coast Guard, including the company name and address. A second table includes information on boats with expired registration, foreign vessels and recreational boats. 

The dataset is available for the entire United States at a cost of $60 for small news organizations, $80 for those be- tween 50,000 and 100,000 circulation (or 25-50 market) and $100 for large news organizations. 

More information is available on the NICAR Web site, www.nicar.org/data, or by calling the data library at (573) 884- 7711. 

Census Workshops 

IRE and NICAR will be holding Census workshops both before and after the data is released. We're working with Steve Doig, of Arizona State University, and Paul Overberg, of USA Today, to provide hands-on training on working with the Census 2000 data. Dates and locations haven't been set yet. 

Stay tuned here or at the IRE Web site, www.ire.org. for more information. 

OW 987 ON LINYER AND 'S'N CHOUN-NON 

11559 OW JO LOOYPS unoss!W JO HON 8EI "Oul pue 

24
