September
October 2002
 Volume 14, Number 5

Published bimonthly by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
 www.nicar.org


DATA ACCESS Year after attacks files still guarded 

SPOTLIGHT: EDUCATION 

By Jennifer LaFleur Reporters Committee for Freedom of the Press 

After Congress passed the 1996 amendments to the Free- dom of Information Act, govern- ment agencies began putting more data and documents on their Web sites. 

But that trend reversed after Sept. 11, 2001, when several federal agencies moved to take down maps, databases and entire Web sites from the pub- lic domain citing security rea- sons. Journalists no longer could get to the data they had used before in news stories. 

Databases add depth to school stories By Holly Hacker, IRE and NICAR 

In particular the door was shut to environmental data, transpor- tation maps, dam locations and other databases frequently used by reporters, community groups and citizens. 

Instead of the usual reports and information on Web sites, many users instead found messages 

School's back in session, so as stu- dents tackle reading and math, jour- nalists can get busy reporting. Whether it's teacher quality or test scores, bud- gets or bus rides, the education beat offers lots of issues worth exploring with computer-assisted reporting. 

Nowadays, journalists need to be even more insightful and aggressive in their education reporting. The federal gov- ernment and all 50 states have put public schools under growing pressure to help kids succeed in the classroom. Most notable is the No Child Left Be- hind Act signed into law by President Bush this year. It requires states to set academic standards for children at each grade level, then to test children to see if they're meeting those standards. 

continued on page 14 

Some groups of children tend to per- form better than others, but in the past those disparities rarely came to light. Now schools must break down test re- sults by race, English proficiency, so- cioeconomic status and other variables 

Schools and districts must publish re- port cards with test scores, graduation rates, teacher qualifications and other data. So for education reporters and CAR junkies, these mandates make for a veritable data-fest with lots of num- bers, statistics and trends to scrutinize. 

SPOTLIGHT: FOR MORE ON EDUCATION SEE: 



Uncovering back-door vouchers, p. 8 
Measuring long bus rides, p. 10 

Data shows cronyism in schools 

By Jason Grotto The Miami Herald 

The principal of Little River Elementary School wears sneakers to work. Armed with a walkie-talkie and clipboard, she patrols one of the poorest schools in Miami-Dade County, monitoring class- rooms, comforting children and assist- ing teachers. She also prepares grant applications and solicits corporate do- nations to buttress the meager re- sources available for her school, which scores at the bottom on Florida's Com- prehensive Assessment Test. 

The cigar-chomping lobbyist wears expensive suits to work. Using politi- cal connections with school board members and a powerful union chief, 

continued on page 19


continued on page 17


IBE 

Bits & Bytes New and updated from the Database Library 



Consumer product safety (new) 

When you mix everyday life and consumer products, the results can be hazardous to your health. For example, from 1990 through 2001 more than 300 people died after they tripped over a consumer product. Find information like this and detailed information about many con- sumer products in the newest addition to the IRE and NICAR Database Library's government database collection: the Con- sumer Product Safety Commis- sion Injury and Death database: 

Former NICAR data analyst Mike Sherry used the CPSC data to investigate elevator safety. His story, "Missouri Pro- gram to Check Elevators Fails to Deliver," ran in the July 7 St. Louis Post-Dispatch. 

The nationwide data covering 1990-2001 includes information about potential injuries, deaths and investigations related to consumer products. Some of the products include children's toys, bicycles, swimming pools, ATVs (three- and four-wheel- ers), sports equipment, hair dry- ers, smoke detectors, playpens, hobby items, lawn mowers and playground equipment. 

continued on page 4 

NICAR UPDATE Changes with Uplink, Database Library 

By David Herzog, NICAR and Missouri School of Journalism 

If you've been reading Uplink for a while, you've probably noticed some changes over the past year. We re- designed the newsletter and added new features to keep you current with the latest goings-on in computer-as- sisted reporting. For instance, we now highlight some of the best uses of analytic mapping software in "Map- ping it Out." But we haven't thrown out those longstanding features, such as "Tech Tips," that our readers have found invaluable. 

Likewise, you'll see some more changes in the issues ahead. One is that we'll coordinate Uplinkmore with The IRE Journal. That means by 2003 we'll have Uplink and the IRE Jour- nal on the same release schedule. And we'll tie Uplink articles more closely to ones that run in The IRE Journal. So if we have an IRE Jour- nal article about an investigative story, the corresponding issue of Up- link may have a related article that dissects the database work that went into the story. 

We're also moving "Bits & Bytes" off Uplink's cover and onto page 2 to make room for one more front-page story. Some of these articles you'll see on the cover will take a look at issues that affect journalists doing computer-assisted reporting. This edition's story about restrictions to 

Census workshops scheduled for reporters, editors 

IRE and NICAR have scheduled three workshops for journalists to learn how to use Census data. 

Paul Overberg of USA Today and Steve Doig of Arizona State University will lead these sessions Oct. 5-6, at USA Today headquarters in McLean, Va.; Nov. 16-17 in Tempe, Ariz.; and Jan. 11- 

12, 2003 in Columbia, Mo. 

The workshops will include story ideas and tips for using the latest and upcoming data releases, including the American Community Survey and Public Use Microdata. 

Visit www.2000census.org for more information and to register. 

data a year after the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11 is but one example. 

Uplink has four new contributing edi- tors who also are working as Univer- sity of Missouri School of Journalism graduate research assistants in the NICAR Database Library. They'll write regularly for Uplink and help develop story ideas. The contributing editors are: 

Megan Christensen, who is a vet- eran of the database library, in her second year working on her master's degree and has interned at the De- troit Free Press. 
Jaimi Dowdell, another veteran of the database library who just started work- ing on her master's degree this fall. 
Holly Hacker, who just left the St. Louis Post-Dispatch to work on her master's degree. She has reported for the Ventura County (Calif.) Star, the Antioch (Calif.) Ledger-Dispatch and the Gazette Newspapers in Mont- gomery County, Md. 
Stephanie Kang, another newcomer to the database library, has begun working on her master's degree and had interned at the Los Angeles Times. 

In addition, Jeff Porter and I are swap- ping Uplink duties so Jeff can focus more of his attention on the work of the database library, where business has picked up considerably during the past few months. With this issue, Jeff becomes assistant managing editor and I become managing editor. 

Thanks for reading Uplink and feel free to e-mail us at uplink@nicar.org if you have any suggestions. 

2


September October 2002


Uplink 

CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

Building a database for tracking state money 

By MaryJo Sylwester, Center for Public Integrity 

State Secrets, an investigation of contributions and expenditures re- ported by state political party commit- tees, started with a pile of paper re- ports that stood more than 15 feet high. That doesn't count thousands of records obtained directly in elec- tronic format. 

All told, there were nearly 400,000 records - and no easy way to put them together. The paper forms differed from state to state. Even the content in a single state didn't always remain consistent. 

As a result, compressing all of that into one table of contributions and another of expenditures - and cleaning them provided valuable lessons in how to build an effective database. 

The Center for Public Integrity, in con- junction with the Center for Respon- sive Politics and the National Institute on Money in State Politics, published the findings of the yearlong investi- gation on June 25. (See the July-Aug. 2002 Uplink for more on political re- porting.) 

Our analysis showed that 46 percent of the money state political parties collected in the 2000 election was soft money from national party coffers. These transfers confirmed a com- monly held perception that state par- ties are used to channel soft money and influence presidential and con- gressional elections. 

Paper to data 

Even the most organized person would be taxed by the collection of hundreds of reports and the data entry. Planning how you're going to tackle the paper pile is crucial no matter the database size. If you don't set it up properly, you'll have bigger problems later. 

There were some things that made life easier with State Secrets: 

I created an Access database where our staff members tracked our FOIA requests for each state, including phone numbers, Web sites, and notes. They also had a Word file for each state for more extensive notes and e-mails. I could run a query to quickly see what was missing. 
I pored over the campaign finance forms listed the various features of each in an Excel worksheet. This showed me which fields were neces- sary for data entry and where the limi- tations were. 
We hired a data entry firm. This was, by far, the best move we made. 
We broke the work into manageable chunks. In this case, it was on a state- by-state basis. Once all the data entry, basic cleanup and checking was done on each of the states, we appended the files together. Some of the cleanup (like standardizing names) was better left until after we assembled the full table, however. 
We ran summary queries to com- pare the total expenditures to the summaries listed on paper reports. We found missing pages, duplicate records and even bad math on the part of the political parties that we would not have found without these queries. 

In hindsight, I should have created ID numbers for each of the paper re- ports. The data entry house could have typed those IDs into the data to indicate which paper report each item came from. And the forms could have been stored in numerical order for easier access. 

Instead, we used the name or date of the report (such as "Fourth Quarter report" or "Pre-Primary"), but there was so much inconsistency we had to spend several days standardizing the report names in order to do the sum- mary queries mentioned above. 

I also would have assigned a code to each committee to be typed in addi- tion to the name. We applied a code only after the information was typed a difficult process because the com- mittee names were never consistent. 

The scrubbing phase 

Before embarking on data cleanup you should answer two questions: What standards do you want to meet? And how dirty is the data? (See page 16 for details.) 

On the expenditure data, we decided it would be an ineffective use of our time to clean up all recipient names, but consultant names should be stan- dardized so we could focus on those. On the contribution data, we scrubbed and scrubbed to make sure the contributor names were as clean as we could get them. We set a very high standard because we wanted to be positive that we identified the true top donors. 

Figuring out the dirtiness of the data is the harder part. I'd recommend running queries, and making notes about the variations you find. Are there big chunks with consistent patterns that could be fixed using an update query? If you can pinpoint places to do mass updates first, that will save work later. Eventually, you'll have to do line-by-line cleanup no matter what, so do what- ever you can to minimize that. 

All of the suggestions I've listed here are beneficial no matter how small or large the database. Consistency and advanced planning will make your job much easier in the long run. 

MaryJo Sylwester, formerly with the Center for Public Integrity and now with USA Today, can be contacted by e-mail at imsylwester@usatoday.com 

September October 2002


3


www.nicar.org 

MAPPING The latest uses of mapping in news reporting. 

Plotting school data 

Public education agencies collect huge amounts of information about students, teachers and schools. And most of that data can easily be tied into a geographic location: a school building point, an attendance zone or even a census tract. So there are plenty of opportunities for journalists to use GIS analysis in education re- porting. Here are some ways that journalists have been turning to GIS to help uncover trends in education. 

Shifting attendance 

John Welbes, an education reporter for the St. Paul Pioneer Press, heard during a school board meet- ing last year that some Minnesota school districts had been losing stu- dents under the state's open enroll- ment system. That meant those schools also lost state aid money tied to enrollment. 

Welbes obtained an Excel spread- sheet from the state that contained one row for every public school stu- dent. One column contained the identification number of the school that the student attended. Another contained the identification number of the school district in which the stu- dent resided. 

Using that file, Janet Roberts, the newspaper's computer-assisted re- porting coordinator, summarized the data by loss or gain for the region's school districts. She im- ported the table to ArcView and mapped the changes in the Minne- apolis-St. Paul metropolitan area. 

School choice/open enrollment
 in Minnesota
 Effect on school districts
 :10 1 percent loss
 <1 percent gainnels
 1 10-percent gain
 11 27 percent gain

Mpts

St Paul


Map 1: A St. Paul Pioneer Press map shows that school districts in the Twin Cities lost students under the state s open enrollment program. 

(See Map 1) The map showed that center city districts lost students; so did some in the suburbs. 

Charter schools 

As part of its "Cheating the Classroom" stories, reporters at The Miami Herald wanted to see whether charter schools in Miami-Dade County were anything like their surrounding neighborhoods. (See the cover story in this edition of Uplink for a more detailed account of the series.) 

The Herald had a data file with infor- mation about each school, including the school's street address. Using the geocoding function in ArcView, da- tabase editor Jason Grotto created a point map layer that showed the location of all the schools. Then he joined a table of school demographic information and another of neighbor- hood demographic data from Cen- sus 2000. 

Grotto then selected nearby non- charter public schools in another map layer and found that many of the charter schools' student demo- graphics were different from those in adjacent public schools. In ad- dition, the GIS analysis showed that the charter schools failed to reflect the neighborhoods they were supposed to serve. 

For instance, according to its con- tract with the Miami-Dade schools, Miami Shores/Barry University charter school is required to serve students within a 4-mile radius, and its population should reflect the community. But the mapping showed the charter was the only public middle school in that 4 mile radius where fewer than 25 percent of the students received free or re- duced lunch. It also was the only school with a majority white student population. (See Map 2). 

6


September October 2002


Uplink 

CHARTER SCHOOL GRAPHIC 

COO

Pct Students Free/Reduced

Golden Glades
Less than 25 Percent

25 to 75 Percent

Opa-locka

North Miami
76 to 99 Percent

P
Majority Race Skul aged childi

BLACK

CHARTER
WHITE

Westview

Miami Shores

West

Little River

Miami


Would you be willing to share a mapping example with fellow journalists? Send an electronic copy of the map along with details to David Herzog at dherzog@nicar.org. 

Map 2: This map helped Miami Herald reporters see that a charter school, located in the center of the map, failed to reflect the student population in the surrounding community. The graduated size schools symbols show that the charter school had a lower student poverty level. 

See the series on the Web at: www.miami.com/mld/miamiherald/ 3024226.htm. 

School week 

The Denver Postused ArcView 3.2 for a story about Colorado school districts that switched to four-day weeks. (See Map 3) The map showed that the switch to a shorter school week mostly was happen- ing in the rural parts of the state, where administrators were trying to save money. 

Monte Whaley, one of the newspaper's education reporters, entered the in- formation about the district sched- ules from the Colorado Department of Education into a spreadsheet. CAR editor Jeff Roberts then mapped the results using a school districts shapefile. 

Four-day districts

Fourdays. shp
 Schidistricts

N

W
E

Start


Map 3: The Denver Post created a map that showed how a switch to four-day school weeks mostly was happening in the rural parts of the state. 

September October 2002


7


www.ire.org 

SPOTLIGHT: EDUCATION 

Uncovering "back-door vouchers' 

By James E. Wilkerson, The (Allentown, Pa.) Morning Call 

Late last year, the superintendent of schools for the Roman Catholic Diocese of Allentown, Pa., told our education re- porter Nancy Averett that the schools had received more than $600,000 in tuition donations from local businesses under a new state tax-credit program. 

She already knew about the program, but was surprised by the amount go- ing to one diocese. Dubbed "back-door vouchers" by critics, the scholarship tax 

was being funneled to religious schools with very little supervision or follow-up from the state. 

The program, started in early 2001, gives businesses up to 90 percent state tax credit for money they donate to nonprofit organizations, which then distribute the money to students for tuition. Unlike full-blown vouchers, voted down in the state legislature three times in recent years, support- 

Access

Seconds
Icon
yendine
Bot

a
Q.

ME Sam Sent

IV's

as

160

Will

Server
Tax Credits
SC Over
tursiign
©tax credits...


credits were clearly funneling a lot of tax dollars to private, nonprofit schools. So Nancy came to me wondering if we could find out exactly how much. 

Program administrators with the state Department of Community and Eco- nomic Development said they didn't know. In fact, there was a lot about the donations they didn't know. So we ended up having to build our own da- tabase, one that allowed us to show how millions of dollars in tax money 

ers emphasized that the tax credit took no money directly from public school funds. 

That argument seemed a little flimsy to us, however. The program diverted money away from the state coffers, money that could have easily gone to education. And, we suspected, most of that money went to private religious schools. In past legislative sessions, the potential of public money aiding private religious schools had triggered 

vehement opposition. 

Background research 

To do the job right, we had to examine more than 100 organizations approved by the state to receive scholarship money. 

That's where the computer-assisted re- porting work started. Nancy was famil- iar with Access, so I created an easy- to-use database that we could both use whenever our schedules allowed. Us- ing the Forms Wizard, I created a simple data entry form that included the organization's name and other basic in- formation, and provided space for us to add research notes, Web sites and other information we found. 

The state had lists of approved orga- nizations on its Web site, including ad- dress, contact information and Web address. I copied those into a power- ful text editor, UltraEdit, (available at www.ultraedit.com) and designed mac- ros that parsed the five rows of data for each organization into a fixed-width text file that I later imported into Ac- cess. I added the fields from the table we had created in Access and we were ready to roll. 

We relied almost exclusively on the Internet, Lexis-Nexis and our own newspaper archive for researching the organizations. Especially useful was GuideStar (www.guidestar.com), a da- tabase containing the financial disclo- sure forms (Form 990) that nonprofit organizations are supposed to file an- nually with the Internal Revenue Ser- vice. In some cases we were unable to find information about an organization elsewhere, but the 990s on GuideStar provided details about how the groups were distributing money. 

Merging data 

Within three weeks or so we had fin- ished the bulk of our research. By that time, the state had given us a list of contributing businesses and the dona- tion amounts that went to the nonprofits. 

Unfortunately, the data was in two files, with the business name and address information in Word and the donation 

8


September October 2002


Uplink 

amounts in Excel. I converted the Word document into a text file and again used UltraEdit to convert the information into 

After running our findings by state of- ficials and finding out that they had higher totals, we realized that we 

Business Leadership Organized for Catholic Schools (BLOCS)

222 N. 17th Street
 Philadelphia, PA 19103
 Type: Scholarship

Web since Hoes

Contact Name: Regina DiGuitio
 Phone Number: (215) 587-0590
 E-mail Address:

Primarily Renefits Religious School or Schools? Yes

Contributions as of 2002

Date

Company
Organization

College

Unit

Advanced Home Health

Authoris Daniely Associates
Cremited
for
Cabobe

SBLOCS)

Arazapic Sports and
Cigarized
inc
Catheto

Beneficial Manual
Pagess
Cruspica
for
Catholic
Schools

(BLOCS)

12/03/01
Base
Creditor
Cathelic
 (BLOCS)

Corn O'Cegago

Organizer

(BLOCS)

DVI Financial Services
Organizes
Stack


columns and rows. Once that was com- pleted, I imported the fixed-width text and Excel files into Access and merged them into one table. 

Fortunately, with few exceptions, the nonprofit names were the same in all of the documents I was using. That al- lowed me to join on the name field with little clean-up. 

When it came time to produce num- bers, I had whittled the data down to two tables: Our research table, which included data about the organizations receiving money, and the business and donation table. 

Tallying results 

I used SQL Server for my analysis, but the work could have just as easily been done in Access or any other database program. I joined the two tables on the organization name field and ran some simple Group By queries to look at the distribution of the donations. 

In the end, we found that more than half of the $17 million in donations had gone to scholarship organiza- tions that primarily benefited religious schools. Looking only at scholarship organizations, about 75 percent of donations had gone to religious schools. 

were missing some data. We put the story on hold until the year- end data became available in April. However, in the follow- ing weeks we kept plugging away at or- ganization research and updated other data. When the final data became available we were ready to start writing. 

Our final story, which ran Aug. 4, showed not only that the lion's share of money was going to religious groups, but that the state was doing very little to track how the money was being used. 

Though the total con- tribution tally had climbed to about $30 million, the share of scholarship contributions going to re- ligious organizations held steady, at about 75 percent, so our story did not change drastically during the delay. 

In fact, interviews with administrators at some of top contribution-getters in the state showed that much of the money was being distributed to stu- dents already in private schools, un- dermining the state's claim that needy students in poorly performing public districts were being targeted. 

Along with the story, I built a Web lookup tool that allows readers a look at contribution lists. The story and query are available at www. mcall.com/all-a1_5 voucheraug04.story 

James E. Wilkerson can be reached by e-mail at james.wilkerson@mcall.com 



(all
File	Edit	Vew	Favorites	Tools	Help
Search	Favorites	Media
Address
Pennsylvania Nonprofits
Ordered by Total Contributions
Click on the business or organization
name for more details
Scholastic Opportunity
1	Scholarship Fund (SOS)	SO Pittsburgh	PA $1,982,864
2	The Mennonite Foundation Inc.	SO Goshen	IN $1,200,053
Business Leadership Organized
3	for Catholic Schools (BLOCS)	SO Philadelphia PA $1,152,090
Diocese of Scranton Scholarship
4	SO	Scranton	PA $1,142,977
Foundation
5	Henkels Foundation	SO	Blue Bell	PA $776,499
6	Neumann Scholarship Foundation	SO	Harrisburg	PA $718,386
Eastern Pennsylvania Scholarship
7	Foundation	SO	Allentown	PA $682,840
Pittsburgh Jewish Educational
8	Improvement Foundation	so Pittsburgh	PA	$623,622
9	Philadelphia Youth Network, Inc.	EIO	Philadelphia	P.A.	$621,736
10 STAR Foundation	SO	Erie	PA $582,455
Foundation for Jewish Day
11	SO Philadelphia PA $517,796
Schools of Greater Philadelphia
12 Abington Friends School	SO Jenkintown PA $462,000
Junior Achievement of South
13	EIO	Warrendale PA $452,083
Internet



September
October 2002


ME Derabass 

SPOTLIGHT: EDUCATION 

Measuring long bus rides for rural children 

By Scott Finn and Eric Eyre, The Charleston Gazette 

During the past decade, West Virginia education officials closed one of every five schools in a massive consolidation drive. State officials said the closings were necessary because of dwindling enrollments in rural areas. 

Parents and consolidation opponents said rural children were forced to ride the bus four hours a day or longer be- cause of the closings. State officials said most children rode the bus for only a short period of time. Each side relied on anecdotal evidence to back their claims. 

We started with asking a simple ques- tion: "How long are children's bus rides in West Virginia?" 

We thought that someone, some- where within the educational bureau- cracy would have attempted to an- swer that question. Instead, we dis- covered the state Department of Edu- cation had ignored a 1998 state law telling them to study the issue of lengthening bus rides. 

Even if education officials had followed the law, West Virginia's antiquated record-keeping system made it almost impossible to answer the question. In other states, school systems keep computerized records of bus routes and riders. But most of the school dis- tricts in 35 rural counties did not. In fact, bus drivers themselves kept most of the records by hand. 



Microsoft Excel uplinkbustimes
File	Edit	View	Insert	Format	Tools	Data	Window	Help
ABC	to	?	B
G41	=	=COUNTIF	2:G36,	">0:30")
A	B	C	D	E	F	G	H	J
1	Bus#	County	begin	el end	ms end	hs end	el dif	ms diff	hs diff
22	152	Monroe	7:05	8:03	8:03	8:15	0:58	0:58	1:10
23	154	Monroe	6:50	7:55	7:55	7:45	1:05	1:05	0:55
24	155	Monroe	7:01	7:43	7:43	8:15	0:42	0:42	1:14
25	156	Monroe	7:08	7:55	7:55	8:25	0:47	0:47	1:17
26	157	Monroe	6:25	7:55	7:55	8:25	1:30	1:30	2:00
27	158	Monroe	7:11	7:45	7:45	8:10	0:34	0:34	0:59
28	159	Monroe	7:17	7:50	7:50	8:14	0:33	0:33	0:57
29	160	Monroe	7:15	8:05	8:05	0:50	0:50
30	161	Monroe	6:55	7:55	7:55	7:36	1:00	1:00	0:41
31	162	Monroe	7:18	7:46	7:46	8:17	0:28	0:28	0:59
32	163	Monroe	7:05	7:45	7:45	8:15	0:40	0:40	1:10
33	164	Monroe	6:55	7:50	7:50	8:15	0:55	0:55	1:20
34	166	Monroe	7:25	8:06	0:41
35	167	Monroe	6:48	7:40	7:40	8:15	0:52	0:52	1:27
36	168	Monroe	6:48	7:45	7:45	8:15	0:57	0:57	1:27
37
38	average	0:49	0:49	1:08
39	median	0:51	0:51	1:10
40
41	over	30	21	17
42	total	34	34	29
43	percent	88.2%	61.8%	58,6%
44
CSCA	Sheet1 Sheet2 Sheet3
Ready



So we had to construct our own da- tabase of 1,569 bus runs in rural counties. We started our project in- tending to study all bus rides in the state, but we soon discovered that many urban districts also did not keep computerized busing records. We decided to focus on the state's rural counties, in part because that's where the longest bus rides occur, and to keep the data entry manageable. 

The process, from FOIA requests to data entry to double-checking, took us eight months. But the resulting ability to write with authority made the effort worthwhile. 

In "The Long Haul," published in Au- gust, we found the number of children who rode the bus more than two hours a day doubled during the 1990s. Also, we found that two-thirds of bus routes carrying elementary children exceeded state guidelines for a "reasonable" bus ride - an hour per day or less. The average student at Clay Elementary, a typical rural school, spent 37 minutes on the bus each way, nine minutes longer than the average Los Angeles commuter. 

Our data helped us locate the best ar- eas for conducting interviews and find- ing stories. In one county, elementary school students counted the 46 bolts on the roof of their bus to while away their hour-and-40 minute ride to school. Teachers at one high school slipped cups of coffee to 15-year-old students to help them stay awake in class. Par- ents of one 4-year-old dressed him in his sleep so he could enjoy a few more minutes of sleep before his one-and- a-half hour ride. 

Gathering the data 

Through the state Freedom of Informa- tion Act, we obtained records for bus runs for the state's 35 most rural coun- ties. (Those counties were eligible for federal school construction funds be- cause they were the most sparsely populated of the state's 55 counties.) 

At first, several county school systems fought our efforts to obtain the bus 

10


September October 2002


Uplink 

routes. Some claimed it contained pri- vate information, so we asked them to redact any personal information, such as children's names. Other school systems wanted to charge us large sums for the printing. A couple of counties required us to drive up to three hours to their headquarters to ob- tain the records. 

We created an Excel spreadsheet that included when each run started, when it stopped, and how much time children rode inbetween. 

The bus runs represented the long- est possible time a child might ride a bus. The run began when the first child stepped on the bus, and ended when the children were dropped off at an elementary, middle or high school. The bus run times did not in- clude the time children stood waiting for the bus to arrive. These were ideal times, not taking into account bad weather or traffic delays. 

Calculating with Excel 

To determine how long each bus run was we subtracted the start time from the drop-off time. We then used Excel's Count If function to count only the runs that exceeded state guide- lines. We divided that by the total count to determine the percent of runs over the guidelines. 

The average bus ride could not be tabulated for most counties because the schools don't track when indi- vidual children board their bus. Clay County is one of the few that tracks exactly when each child boards the bus and when they are dropped off. Because we had the data, we were able to determine that the average Clay Elementary student spent 37 minutes on the bus, more than the state guideline of 30 minutes. The average middle school student was on the bus for 34 minutes, the aver- age high school student for 38. 

We checked our results with transpor- tation directors in all 35 counties, both through phone calls and by sending a copy of their county's data to them 

through the mail. We made corrections to the database based on their re- sponses. In some cases, we spent half an hour going over a particularly com- plicated bus schedule with a transpor- tation director. 

For purposes of the stories, junior high schools were classified as middle schools. Buses for special education students, who often ride much longer than other students, were excluded from the database. 

We also relied upon two surveys of county school transportation directors by the state Department of Education, one in 1992 and the most recent in 1996. The survey asked transportation directors to estimate how many chil- dren rode the bus for longer than state guidelines allow. 

Those surveys are imperfect, be- cause they rely upon the impressions of the directors and not hard data. For example, one county's survey had ex- actly 600 students on the bus for one time increment, and exactly 700 for another increment, leading us to be- lieve the times were estimates, not the detailed study state officials led us to believe. If anything, we believed they tended to underestimate the amount of time children spend on the bus, based on comparisons to our spreadsheet. 

So far, the story has resulted in a prom- ise from the state transportation direc- tor to computerize all bus schedules and complete its own study about the length of bus rides. 

We are planning more stories this fall on the damaging effects school clos- ings have on the state's youngest and poorest students. 

To see the whole series, visit www.wvgazette.com/news/Closing/ 

Contact Scott Finn by e-mail at sfinn@wvgazette.com. 

Contact Eric Eyre by e-mail at ericeyre@wvgazette.com. 

Annual Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference 

MARCH 14-16, 2003 

Charlotte


NORTH CAROLINA 

Panels that touch on every beat: Census, crime, education, local and state government, freedom of information and transportation 

Handson computer classes: 

Spreadsheets, database managers, mapping, statistical software and more 

For hotel reservations call: 

866-837-4148 and ask for the Investigative Reporters and Editors room block before Feb. 14 The Westin Charlotte 601 S. College St. Charlotte, NC 28202 

Sponsors: The Charlotte Observer NBC News 

REGISTER ONLINE AT 

www.ire.org/charlotte or call 573-882-2042 

September October 2002


11


HOMELAND SECURITY 

Rating cities' readiness to handle attacks 

By Mike Fish, CNN.com 

Just how prepared are major U.S. cit- ies to face a terrorist attack? Can we assume places like New York and Washington,D.C are more up to speed than, say, Milwaukee or Columbus? 

The questions were being posed by editors at CNN.c as another pos- sible follow up to events of Sept. 11. Like several news organizations, we had completed a computer-assisted reporting project that focused on the airline industry and security at the 

that produced "How Prepared Is Your City?" on the Web site, a 30-minute spe- cial report on "Wolf Blitzer Reports" and also a TV package by CNN Homeland Security correspondent Jeanne Meserve. 

The early challenges were plenty. First, we were determined to produce a thoughtful package that would both enlighten and address people's con- cerns, yet at the same time wouldn't serve as a blueprint for would-be ter- rorists and criminals. We found this 

HOW PREPARED IS YOUR CITY?
SELECT A CITY
 New York City. New York

The overall city assessment is based on the ratings of
 six law enforcement, security/terrorism and emergency
 management experts in four categories using a
 one-to-five scale (one being best prepared). The overall
 assessment - an average of the scores -- is derived
 from a scale that assigned four levels of preparedness:
 Most Prepared, Well Prepared, Prepared and Less
 Prepared.
CITY
 ASSESSMENTS

OVERALL
More prepared
 TRANSPORTATION
3.42
 HOSPITALMEDICAL
1.133
 FEDERAL PREPAREDNESS
1.833
METHODOLOGY EXPERTS' SOURCES
 CNN CITY SURVEY
1.167


country's busiest airports, and there was a desire to similarly rank, or at least gauge, the performance of ma- jor cities. 

Terrorism experts, who by all appear- ances had multiplied in number after Sept. 11, were insisting on two things: no city is immune from risk and no one is fully prepared to handle the fallout of an attack. So folks couldn't help but worry about their own safety as well as suddenly wondering if their city was schooled to deal with everything from biological to chemical threats. 

To assess the preparedness of the larg- est cities, CNN.com undertook a com- puter-assisted reporting project last fall 

also to be the top concern of the ex- perts who were interviewed or assisted us in evaluating the cities. 

This ongoing dialogue with a team of experts proved invaluable, as they often had first-hand knowledge of the preparedness efforts and vulnerabili- ties within a number of major cities. We also were able to seek their input on the statistical data, federal grant money and such criteria that would best help in evaluating the work done by city officials leading up to Sept. 11. 

Narrowing the cities 

OK, but how many cities could we re- view in depth? We thought initially 50, until deciding it would be too over- 

whelming and time consuming a task. And when we considered 25, we struggled to justify eliminating impor- tant cities like Miami and Atlanta that barely missed making the cut. 

Ultimately, we reviewed national crime statistics reports and devel- oped our top 30 cities by the criteria that cities had to have a population of at least 350,000 and also employ at least ,100 full-time police officers. Even then, to include as many cities as possible, Dallas/Fort Worth and San Francisco/San Jose were com- bined rather than evaluated individu- ally. We made sure to present sepa- rate data on each city in our final re- port and, as it turned out, our final rankings for these cities would have been the same no matter which way we did it. 

That bit of information would prove helpful in addressing challenges from Fort Worth and San Jose officials, who argued that their respective cit- ies had their own individual issues and didn't care to be evaluated with their neighbors. 

Once we were comfortable with our list of cities, we dug for every shred of relevant data and public record that was available. The analysis would fo- cus on four crucial categories: trans- portation (access to and from emer- gency sites); hospital/medical; federal preparedness (an evaluation of fund- ing and training programs); and emer- gency management. 

True preparedness is often deemed best achieved where the local, state and fed- eral governments - as well as mem- bers of the private sector -work as part- ners. But we recognized a challenge in preparing for emergencies was also get- ting access to available resources. 

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, we found, awarded $120 million to states during the past two years to upgrade public health's capacity to respond to bioterrorism. But only four cities received separate grants, includ- ing New York ($1.14 million), Chicago 

12


September October 2002


Uplink


($902,089), Los Angeles ($850,275) and Washington, D.C. ($570,317). 

Finding, analyzing and weighting the value of consistent, statistical data that could be applied, in our four categories, across the 30 selected cities, would be a key to making this study work. 

Surveying experts 

Early in the project, however, it be- came apparent that statistics alone were not going to tell us the full story of a city's preparedness. Some of the information that would be valuable in evaluating cities, such as details about pharmaceutical stockpiles, is appropri- ately guarded. 

The experts stressed the need to weigh intangibles, such as how the uni- formed services work together as well as the level of commitment from the private sector to participate in training. So while accumulating the data in each of our four categories, CNN.com also provided local emergency manage- ment directors with a 10-question sur- vey to evaluate staffing, training and such key questions as: 

Who does your city's emergency management director report to? 
A. Mayor's office/city or county manager 
B. Police department 
C. Fire department 
D. Other 
The number of your full-time staff dedicated solely to emergency man- agement? 
A. More than 10 
B. 5-to-10 
C. 1-to-5 
D. 0 
In the current fiscal year, the amount received by your department for ter- rorism planning, training and equip- ment? 
A. More than $1 million B. $500,000-to-$1 million C. $100,000-to-$500,000 D. Less than $100,000 

All of the data accumulated by CNN.cor was later shared with the 

local emergency management direc- tors, who were offered the opportu- nity to comment and report any cor- rections. In most cases, it required multiple follow-up calls and faxes but it was crucial that officials confirm the accuracy of data that would be used in the city evaluations. 

Eventually, we would provide our em- pirical data to six law enforcement, se- curity/terrorism and emergency man- agement experts asking them to rate the cities in each of the four catego- ries, using a one-to-five scale (one be- ing best prepared). The Disaster and Terrorism Assessment Survey given the experts was a 22-page document that included key potential vulnerabilities of each city, general city information such as the number of police officers per 10,000 residents and then specific data compiled within our four categories. 

Such a scale is recognized by, among others, the National Institute for Com- puter-Assisted Reporting, as a common grading system within academia, the media and law enforcement. The U.S. Department of Justice provides the same scale for a self-assessment by states applying for domestic prepared- ness grants. The most comprehensive was hospital/medical, which included 18 items ranging from physicians and emergency outpatients per 10,000 resi- dents to whether the state employed a public health veterinarian and the num- ber CDC-sponsored "disease detectives." 

being most prepared, well prepared, prepared or less prepared. 

While reviewing the data, we stressed the importance for the experts to rely on their own experience with the cit- ies. So factored into the evaluation was their awareness that some cities face a greater risk because of such things as location, commerce, land- marks and hosting major events. 

The final overall assessment, using Excel spreadsheet software, of the 30 cities was based on the simple aver- age of the experts ranking, with CNN.com weighting the hospital/ medical category 1.5 times because of its importance and the volume of relevant data. Cities were judged as 

In the end, only New York, having ear- lier experienced attacks on the World Trade Center, was judged most pre- pared. We did a separate story look- ing at New York's performance and the lessons learned. 

The major knock against New York came in the transportation category, where experts cited the potential for gridlock- a factor in getting responders to the scene as well as transporting the injured and ill to medical facilities. 

Several other large cities also fared poorly under transportation - notably Boston, Philadelphia and Detroit. The panel judged them overall less pre- pared, joined by Las Vegas, Milwau- kee and New Orleans. CNN.com shared the rankings with city officials before publishing and produced a separate story detailing heightened preparedness as well as steps taken by the individual cities since Sept. 11. Our analysis also found: 

While cities are better prepared than prior to Sept. 11, significant improve- ment is still needed in public health, emergency response, evacuation plan- ning and inter-agency communication. 
Las Vegas and New Orleans, two ma- jor tourist/convention cities, are located in states that do not employ public health veterinarians, who could be helpful in the early detection of a bio- logical crisis. Nor did the cities have a CDC-sponsored disease detective. 
Cities faring best are those like New York who routinely host major events or traditionally face natural disasters, such as Florida and California cities. 

The two-month project produced eight stories for the Web site. Web site visitors could rank the cities on different variables and see how their cities compared to others. 

Mike Fish can be contacted by e-mail at mike.fish@turner.com 

September . October 2002


13


THE 

Guarded continued from page 1 

saying that sites were down or infor- mation was unavailable. 

The U.S. Army's Redstone Arsenal posted this message: "Due to the threat against our nation, our way of life, national security, and because was told to do so, portions of the Team Redstone homepage have been tem- porarily blocked from public viewing." 

Since that time, some of the informa- tion has been returned to government Web sites, much continues to be un- available and additional information is either being removed or not updated. In addition, proposed legislation and rulemaking could restrict information such as pipeline locations, chemical plant information and other "sensitive" types of data. 

Where reporters could once get maps showing pipeline systems, the Office of Pipeline Safety Web site now has this message: "The Office of Pipeline Safety (OPS) has discon- tinued providing open access to the National Pipeline Mapping System (NPMS). Recent events have fo- cused additional security concerns on critical infrastructure systems." 

The agency went beyond removing the information from its Web site. The in- formation is now available only to pipe- line operators and local, state, and fed- eral government officials. 

Tracking closures 

OMB Watch, a nonprofit organization in Washington, D.C., concerned with free- dom of information issues, has tracked federal agencies' removal of information from their Web sites since last fall. 

"We saw a pretty dramatic shutdown," said Sean Moulton, senior policy ana- lyst with OMB Watch. "We haven't seen much of a reversal of that. If it didn't reverse immediately it became stuck amid the debates." 

In December, OMB Watch sent Free- dom of Information Act requests to federal agencies asking them to list what information they had removed from the Web sites. 

The Federal Energy Regulatory Commis- sion refused to comply with the request saying that the mere disclosure of such a list would be problematic. Early removal of information from the agency's Web site was based on size whereby "oversized" documents were removed from the pub- lic reference room. 

"Literally tens of thousands of docu- ments that were 'FOlable' a year ago or that you could just go get are now exempt from FOIA," Moulton said. "With no change in FOIA and no change in court rulings." Rather, the changes were based on interpretation. 

The Federal Aviation Administration responded to the OMB Watch request by saying that they have not taken any- thing down, Moulton said. Yet the Web site where FAA enforcement data was once available now has a message stat- ing: "The Enforcement Information Sys- tem (EIS) is not available at this time due in part to security considerations." (See article on page 15.) 

Moulton said that one of the most re- sponsive agencies to their request was the Environmental Protection Agency. 

"They showed that stuff was taken down and then put back up," Moulton said. 

According to Odelia Funke, chief of EPA's Policy and Program Management Branch, the agency went back and did an inventory of database and identified where there were issues. In the end, much of the information was returned to the agency's site. However, access to some chemical information and direct con- nect access to the agency's Envirofacts Data Warehouse remain unavailable. 

"Agencies that took down stuff whole- sale are having difficulty deciding what to put back up," Funke said during a symposium of the American Society of Access Professionals in September. 

Other efforts 

Moves to take down information were not isolated to federal agencies. Several states removed information from Web sites as well. Pennsylvania removed en- vironmental data from its site; a memo to New York state agencies urged them to review sensitive information; and New Jersey removed chemical information from its Web site. 

Efforts have been made by states to exempt terrorism meetings and home- land security agencies from state pub- lic records acts, 

An Oct. 12 memorandum from Attor- ney General John Ashcroft told federal agencies to carefully consider "disclo- sure determinations" under FOIA. 

A March 19 memo from White House Chief of Staff Andrew Card ordered fed- eral agencies to reexamine information about weapons of mass destruction. A second memo prepared at Card's re- quest tells agencies to look at three cat- egories: classified, reclassified and de- classified, and "sensitive, but unclas- sified" information, The guidance states "the need to protect such sensitive in- formation from inappropriate disclosure should be carefully considered, on a case-by-case basis." 

New Homeland Security legislation also includes tighter restrictions on in- formation dissemination. 

In June, Sen. Christopher "Kit" Bond, R- Mo., introduced the "Community Protec- tion from Chemical Terrorism Act," legis- lation that would restrict access to chemi- cal plants' risk management plans. 

Environmental reporters and citizen groups have used that information to assess the risk of chemical plants in their areas. And although the informa- tion is no longer online, it is available in EPA reading rooms around the coun- try. However, when a chlorine gas cloud spewed from a rail car near Festus, in Bond's home state, reporters did not have at hand access to the risk man- agement plan for the company where the spill occurred. 

14


September October 2002


Uplink 

But risk management plans do not pro- vide overly detailed information about a plant, Moulton said. "It doesn't say where it is stored, nor indicate what it is stored in." 

"There is a risk when industry is not under the watchful eye of the public," Moulton said. 

In July 2001, Ralph Haurwitz and Jeff Nesmith did a series of stories in the Austin American-Statesmanlooking at pipeline safety around the country. 

As a result of the series, federal agen- cies with pipeline oversight have in- creased efforts to update regulatory activities and rulemaking, Haurwitz said. In addition, the Texas Railroad Commission proposed its largest fine ever against a company responsible for an accident in Abilene, Texas. 

Much of the data, including pipeline incidents and company financial infor- mation, is still available. 

But other information concerning pipe- lines in environmentally sensitive areas is no longer available. 

"Today, if a reporter wanted to do a par- ticular analysis dealing with these ar- eas, it would be difficult to do it because the information is no longer public," Haurwitz said. 

The potential for closure of these and other types of "critical infrastructure infor- mation" worries journalism organizations. 

"I think if the government gets its way, it's going to be an awful lot harder to do what we've been doing," said James Bruggers, president of the Society of Environmental Journalists and environmental reporter for The (Louisville, Ky.) Courier-Journal. "I'm not sure what the overall benefit is. The fact that a lot of this information it has been made public has made communities safer." 

Jennifer LaFleur can be contacted by e-mail at :lafleur@reporterscommittee.org. 

By Jeff Porter, IRE and NICAR 

FAA withholds data 

A year ago, right after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, IRE and NICAR provided copies of the Federal Aviation Administration enforce- ment database to well over 100 news organizations. Story after story based on the data provided glimpses of security problems in airports across the United States. 

IRE and NICAR had planned to up- date the database that October, with a routine download from the administration's FTP server. Three days after the attacks, though, the Database Library downloaded the database so journalists could have the most recent information available. 

That was the last time the FAA data update was routine. 

Shortly after the update, the admin- istration pulled the data from its FTP server, citing security. The data has yet to resurface in its entirety. 

After the Database Library's March 29 Freedom of Information Act re- quest, the FAA supplied a copy of the database on June 22 - minus any mention of security or hazard- ous material violations. 

The database still lists actions in some categories, such as flight op- eration or maintenance problems. As for security or hazardous mate- rial violations, the FAA argues that it's none of the public's business. 

The official response from Joseph Tintera, FAA's manager of the regu- latory support division, says, "sen- sitive security information has been withheld citing regulations on whether the information is "detri- mental to the safety of persons traveling in transportation." 

On July 18, IRE filed a letter asking for that denial to be reconsidered. 

IRE argues that since the informa- tion resided on publicly accessible Internet servers from at least No- vember 2000 until October 2001, the FAA had set a precedent. Even prior to that, the agency had pro- vided the data on CD. 

An additional argument: The re- quest didn't seek records that re- veal details of inspections, investi- gations and alleged violations and findings, but rather only general in- formation, allowed to be disclosed. 

Indeed, even before the terrorist attacks, the FAA held back en- forcement actions from public re- lease for a year. 

Aside from security violations, the FAA denying information about problems with hazardous materials is particularly troubling. 

Even before Sept. 11, journalists have used the enforcement data- base to look at hazardous mate- rial violations. In 1999, The (Cleve- land) Plain Dealerpublished a se- ries examining hazardous materi- als on airlines. 

In July, IRE wrote to the agency: "The public should have access to this information to be informed whether government-regulated entities have abided by federal regulations and how government agencies have applied regulations. Failing to provide information to the public concerning mishandling of hazardous materials disregards the public interest and can be detri- mental to the safety of persons traveling in transportation." 

At this writing, the agency has yet to respond. 

Jeff Porter can be contacted by e- mail at jeff@nicar.org 

September . October 2002


15


www.nicar.org 

Tech tip.. FoxPro program cleans, standardizes names By MaryJo Sylwester, Center for Public Integrity 

Because of the massive size of the State Secrets database (see page 3), we couldn't do cleanup in Access and I was the only person in our office with software powerful enough to handle the data (Visual FoxPro). So I came up with a way to have others help with the cleanup without having direct access. 

I exported chunks of the data to Excel files, and had the others put the changes in a new field. Then I wrote a FoxPro program using the Excel copy down functions to apply the changes to the main data file. For further infor- mation, read on, then download an Excel file and FoxPro program file that shows this in action (you can open the FoxPro file with NotePad) from www.nicar.org/techtips.html. 

For example, here's a list of names that needed to be standardized. In this case the first name field needs to be updated to the combined name: 



ID	LAST	FIRST
VA556	Smith	John R
VA557	Smith	John
VA558	Smith	John & Jane
CITY	STATE	NEW FIRST
Reston	VA	John R & Jane
Reston	VA	John R & Jane
Reston	VA	John R & Jane



Then I added two new columns, putting the following pieces of code in them and copying down the length of the data: REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH FOR ID= 

So in this example, the two pieces of code are in columns G and H. The data (as shown above) is in columns A through F. In the next blank col- umn, you concatenate together vari- ous pieces to write the code for a simple program. Here's what it would look like for this example: 

=G2& 



SUP	=GO&"
IID	LAST FIRST	CITY STATE NEW FIRST
VA556 Smith John R	Reston VA	John R & Jane REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH
VA557 Smith John	Reston VA John Jane REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH FOR ID=
VA558 Smith John & Jane Reston VA	John R & Jane REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH:FOR ID=



The result for the first line should look like this: REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH "John R & Jane for ID= "VA556" 

To explain: The ampersand (&) is the tool to tie the pieces together. The first set of quotes provides a space between the word "with" and the "John R & Jane." The next set of quotes (it's four double quotes) is how you tell the computer you want to include the quotes in your answer something that you need in this case to tell the computer that "John R & Jane" is a text string. 

When you copy down the concat- enated formula, you get the appropri- ate ID numbers for each line without a lot of repetitive typing. Then copy just the field that has your answers and paste it into a PRG file in Fox Pro. It will look something like this: 

REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH "John R & Jane* for ID= "VA556" REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH "John R & Jane" for ID= "VA557" REPLACE ALL NEWFIRST WITH "John R & Jane for ID= "VA558" 

You can use this same trick to ap- ply changes to more than one record at a time by looking for key- words. For example, we used this for coding the expenditures. I cre- ated a list in Excel of possible key- words that we might find listed in the purpose field (most of the list came from a group-by query on the purpose field). 

We had previously decided what code each keyword would fall under, so I assigned those in the Excel file. Here's what it looked like: 



MAIL	A4
SALARIES	A2
HOTEL	A1
AIRFARE	A1
OFFICE SUPPLIES	A5
POLLING	C4
DIRECT MAIL	C6



Then, in the Excel file, I added the FoxPro commands, but this time us- ing wildcards. Here's what the com- mand looks like when completed: 

REPLACE ALL PURPCODE WITH "A4" FOR "MAIL" S PURPOSE 

The dollar sign symbol tells FoxPro to find the term "MAIL" anywhere in the field called PURPOSE. 

The coding program ended up be- ing more than 400 lines long because I had so many possible keywords. I kept the Excel file throughout the coding process, and that proved to be worthwhile when we decided to tweak codes. 

Instead of having to sort through the whole FoxPro program file, I simply went back to the Excel file, sorted or filtered it to find the codes I wanted (there might be anywhere from two to 50 lines for any given code) and made the changes. Then I re-copied the formula and pasted it into a new program file. It took maybe five min- utes to make hundreds of changes. 

16


September October 2002


Uplink 

Cronyism continued from page 1 

he scored nearly $300 million in school business for his clients, including a questionable contract that landed him a $4 million payday. 

During an eight-month investigation of Miami-Dade County Public Schools, in- vestigative reporting team colleague Ronnie Greene and I used an array of databases and computer-assisted re- porting techniques to document how tax- payer dollars often benefit lobbyists, con- tractors and former school board mem- bers rather than the district's 365,000 children. Our goal: to bring strong gov- emment reporting into the classroom. 

The Herald's review of a decade's worth of district spending helped ex- plain why morale is low and how poli- tics pervades the school system. 

We used three key databases to fol- low the money as well as Internet re- sources, including tax documents, Se- curities and Exchange Commission fil- ings, property records and state cor- porate records. We also used mapping software and SAS (a statistical and database package) to explore the district's burgeoning charter school movement. Coupling the CAR work with traditional reporting, we were able to present the most comprehensive picture ever of how the struggling dis- trict does business. 

A triangle 

Miami-Dade's public school system has a $4.1 billion budget, about the same as county hall. But unlike county hall, the district had no independent inspector general with power to probe spending. It was a perfect niche for our newspaper to fill. 

Conceptually, our approach to follow- ing the money was a triangle. First, we needed to know with whom the district did business and the money involved. Second, we had to track which lobby- ists companies hired to score contracts. And finally, we had to know how much 

campaign money lobbyists and com- panies contributed to school board members. Much of the data, we knew, only was on paper. 

We requested a decade's worth of pa- per campaign contributions from the county's elections department. Turning 10 years of paper into a database was not cheap, but it was indispensable. The bill ran about $4,000. We sold it to our editors by pointing out the ongoing ben- efits of having the information. Once we had the database, we loaded it into SQL Server and created ASP applications that allow reporters to search contributions on our Intranet. It's a resource we con- tinue to utilize. Now when a big contract goes before the school board, reporters can search for corporate officers and lob- byists to see how much they've doled out. And because there are fewer records, updating the database each quarter is relatively cheap. 

Although lobbyists abound at county hall, we found companies that get busi- ness from the district hire a small group of lobbyists with powerful connections. As one of the lobbyists put it, the school system was "the best-kept secret in town." So we created another database from scratch using the district's lobby- ist registration forms. Again, we looked at a 10-year period, this time inputting most of the records ourselves. 

With the lobbyist database, we zeroed in on the three busiest contract-push- ers and found a former superintendent who lobbied his ex-employees months after leaving the system. Because the district keeps most of its electronic in- formation in arcane mainframe data- bases, obtaining the final point of our triangle wasn't easy. When we re- quested a copy of the purchasing da- tabase, they came back with a price of more than $6,000 and said it would take a month to process. There was no way we could sell that to our edi- tors. So we negotiated. Turns out the school district's IT department had a stripped-down subset of the data for auditing purposes. It cost us about $300 and included all the important information: vendor name, item de- 

scription, number of units, cost of per unit, total amount of purchase, date and a purchase order number we could use to trace electronic records back to paper. 

I also learned a cardinal lesson. Be flexible and open to ideas from people who handle the information you seek. Just be sure to get a record layout of any database you're interested in first. Before you can negotiate, you have to know what's in play. 

Once our triangle was complete, we could connect school board members, contracts and campaign contributions. When documenting how the cigar- chomping lobbyist made $4 million off a questionable insurance contract, we were able to quantify his influence. 

Web resources 

From the outset of reporting the series, we learned that a nonprofit organiza- tion, founded by a former school board member, made millions from the dis- trict by serving high-risk children. One of our first moves: going to www.guidestar.com to find the company's federal nonprofit financial disclosure forms, a.k.a. Form 990s. GuideStar contains a wealth of infor- mation for journalists and is often fea- tured in NICAR training. By coupling the tax filings with property records, we learned that the former school board member was the nonprofit's landlord and charged the charity $1 million in rent during a two-year period. 

Privatizing public education is big busi- ness in Florida, and Miami-Dade County is no exception. Edison Schools Inc. was the first private management company hired to run a public school in Miami-Dade. It also partnered with the powerful teachers union to win ap- proval for nine new charter schools. Yet our newspaper never took a hard look at the company. We did not know whether Edison did a better job edu- cating children or how much money it made from the district. 

Using school audits and SEC filings available on www.sec.gov/edgar/, we some found answers. For example, al- continued on page 18 

September October 2002


17


Cronyism continued from page 17 

though the publicly traded company claimed they had yet to make a profit, SEC filings showed Edison had lent its CEO $8 million to buy stock just be- fore landing a huge contract in Phila- delphia. When we asked how much of the school's budget went to the company, they said between 8 percent and 12 per- cent. Yet district audits showed the num- ber was more than 20 percent. 

Searching for documents online isn't the sexiest CAR maneuver, but it's still an important avenue of inquiry. 

Veil of competition 

We used more complicated CAR tactics to explore charter schools, which are built and managed by private companies us- ing public money. Charter school pro- ponents claim they create better schools by forcing districts to compete for kids. If parents and students aren't pleased with the public school, they can take their tax dollars and move to a charter. In a state where schools are underfunded, this is a big issue. 

Among Miami-Dade's charter advocates: a former superintendent who now runs the country's second-largest charter company and a former school board member doing consulting work for the same corporation. 

First, we were interested in what the charters look like. We used a database from the state to determine the schools' demographics, including race, ethnicity and income level. We found that although 70 percent of public elementary school students are eligible for free or reduced- cost lunch, about 40 percent of charter students are. 

Meanwhile, the charter schools were claiming they score better than public schools on Florida's standardized test. Building off great school test analysis done by the Palm Beach Post, we used a statistical method called multiple re- gression to show a more complex pic- ture. We ran regression methods in SAS called STEPWISE and FORWARD and found the higher a school's percentage of students eligible for free or reduced lunch, the lower its test scores. When we took the percentage of low-income students into account, many of the 

Better Watchdog Workshops 

Investigative Reporting on the Beat 

Investigative Reporters and Edtors Inc. and the Society of Professional Journalists, with funding from the Sigma Delta Chi Foundation, have joined forces to offer a series of workshops focused on doing investigative reporting while covering a beat. 

The workshops, specifically for journalists at small- to medium-sized news organizations and those in bureaus of larger organizations, will emphasize the use of freedom-of- information laws and address juggling a beat while producing investigative and enterprise pieces. 

Workshops are scheduled for: Nov. 16 - Fort Lauderdale, Fla. Nov. 23 - Wichita, Kan. Feb. 22, 2003 Phoenix, Ariz. March 22, 2003 St. Petersburg, Fla. March 29, 2003 Columbia, Mo. March 29, 2003 Minneapolis, Minn. April 5, 2003 Cleveland, Ohio April 12, 2003 Spokane, Wash. April 12, 2003 - Long Island, N.Y. 

For more information, visit www.ire.org/training/ betterwatchdog. 

To request a workshop for your area, contact Executive Director Brant Houston at brant@ire.org. 

readme.txt 

Read The Miami Herald"Ch ing the Classroom" stories on the Web at www.miami.com/ mld/miamiherald/ 3024226.htm. 

charters did worse than public schools. 

Reading charter studies in education journals, we came across one that used mapping software to compare the demo- graphics of charters to adjacent public schools. From the state statutes we al- ready knew that there was no charter money earmarked for transportation, so most attracted students from nearby. 

We used mapping software called ArcView to geocode the address of ev- ery school in the county and joined schools' demographic info and 2000 Census data to the maps. Geocoding turns street addresses in data tables into points on a map. Then we drew circles around the charters to capture nearby public schools and neighbor- hood demographics. The result: Char- ter schools were vastly different from adjacent public schools and many looked nothing like the neighborhoods they supposedly served. 

All charter schools must sign a contract with the district outlining which students they planned to serve and how. For ex- ample, one contract stated that it would serve students "within a reasonable dis- tance, not greater than four miles from the school" and "achieve a racial/eth- nic balance reflective of the commu- nity." Yet our analysis revealed that while the neighborhood was 80 percent black, the school was 26 percent black. And, although other schools within four miles had populations that were 75 per- cent or more low income, the charter school had less than 25 percent. We helped put a strong focus on which "community" the charter served. 



Jason Grotto can be reached by e-mail at JGrotto@herald.com 

18


September October 2002


Uplink 

Education 

continued from page 1 

Stories, education, data That's just one idea of how to examine education. As this issue of Uplink shows, more ideas abound. 

James E. Wilkerson of The (Allen- town, Pa.) Morning Cal/describes how he built a database that showed that a new tax-credit program in Pennsylva- nia funneled millions of tax dollars to religious schools with little state over- sight. Instead of helping needy kids in failing public schools, as intended, much of the money went to children already in private schools. 
Scott Finn and Eric Eyre of the Charles- on(W.Va) Gazette discuss how they built a database of school bus schedules in rural West Virginia. Their investigation found that thousands of children rode school buses at least two hours a day, in violation of state laws and guidelines. 
Jason Grotto of The Miami Heraldex- plains how he used a variety of data- bases to expose questionable spend- ing by Miami-Dade school officials that benefited lobbyists, contractors and former colleagues but did little to help students. In one case, a lobbyist made $4 million from a single deal. 

Data at all levels 

Fortunately, journalists can find lots of education data on a local, state and national (in a few cases, even interna- tional) level. To find helpful federal data, try the National Center for Education Statistics (www.nces.ed.gov), a branch of the U.S. Department of Education. The most comprehensive database is the Common Core of Data. It has ba- sic information on every public school and school system in the United States, including student enrollment and de- mographics, finance data, teacher and staff counts, and graduation and atten- dance rates. Files are updated annually and can be downloaded from the Web. 

The data can help answer lots of ques- tions: How much do school districts 

spend on each student, on average? How much education funding does the state provide? What is the teacher-pu- pil ratio? Which school systems have a high percentage of minority students, and how has that changed over time? 

For higher education data, NCES has the Integrated Postsecondary Educa- tion Data System. It gives basic infor- mation on colleges and universities, including student enrollment, tuition charges, degrees offered, admission re- quirements, number and type of degrees awarded, finance data and faculty sala- ries. These files, too, are updated yearly and can be downloaded. 

Another branch of the Education De- partment, the Office for Civil Rights (www.ed.gov/offices/OCR), keeps data that let reporters look for possible in- equities in schools and districts. For ex- ample, the OCR tracks enrollment in gifted and talented classes, special edu- cation and Advanced Placement courses by race and gender. It looks at discipline rates for students with disabilities, and participation in sports by gender. 

Don't forget the U.S. Census Bureau (www.census.gov), which tells how many kids go to public and private school and how much education adults have. It's also possible to look at de- mographic data by school district. 

Digging for state info 

Many state education departments keep useful and more current data on schools and school districts. Find out what information the state collects, when it's collected, and how it's stored. Some states put downloadable files on their Internet sites. For instance, the California Department of Education (www.cde.ca.gov) has files on enroll- ment, dropouts, graduates, teacher qualifications and credentials, high school graduation requirements and English proficiency. 

If you can't find what you're looking for, call the state. They might have it, just not online. When I covered education in Missouri, I could download files from the state's education Web site 

(www.dese.state.mo.us) with test scores and the percentage of low-in- come students by school. For other data, such as dropout or graduation rates by school, I called the state's data experts and had them either e-mail me the files or post them on their FTP site. 

Those who are familiar with spread- sheets and databases might want to try more sophisticated approaches to covering education. Many newspapers across the country don't just report school test scores; they take family in- come and other variables into account. This can help level the playing field between schools in affluent neighbor- hoods vs. those in poor ones, since family income has such a strong effect on test scores (the poorer the children, the worse they tend to do on tests). 

Holly Hacker, formerly an education reporter for the St. Louis Post-Dispatch, can be contacted by e-mail at holly@nicar.org. 

readme.t 

Resources 

The IRE Resource Center provides stories and tipsheets to help journalists. Search the story and tipsheet databases at www.ire.org/resourcecenter. Call 573-882-3364 to order these and other investigative stories and tipsheets. 

Tipsheet 

"Measuring Equality in Schools:" Doug Haddix of The Columbus Dispatch explains how to analyze a school's racial composition, income levels, and changes in attendance by using a district's student and teacher computer records. The tipsheet shows how Haddix used data from the district accounting system to look at spending. The Dispatchpublished a four-day series called "Dividing Lines" in June 2000 with the material. (See Tipsheet #1518) 

September
October 2002


19


Uplink


Uplink Info 

A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

brant@ire.org Brant Houston Editor 

dherzog@nicar.org David Herzog Managing Editor 

jeff@nicar.org Jeff Porter Asst. Managing Editor 

Lisa Triefenbach Art Director 

Pia Christensen Copy Editor 

Stephanie Kang Holly Hacker Jaimi Dowdell Megan Christensen Contributing Editors 

School of Journalism. Editors Inc. and the Missouri of Investigative Reporters and NICAR is a joint program 

data analysis. training programs, tipsheets and government databases, supplying journalists with NICAR services include 

573-884-7711 Editorial 

573-882-2772 Subscriptions 

len@ire.org Len Bruzzese Director of Publications 

pia@ire.org Pia Christensen Advertising Coordinator 

jgreen@ire.org John Green Subscription Administrator 

IRE members $40, nonmembers $60 Subscriptions 

Columbia, MO 65211 Missouri School of Journalism IRE-NICAR, 138 Neff Annex Uplink Address: 

address changes to IRE-NICAR. Postmaster: Please send 



EII JO di LIII JO aw 

s'n GIVd OW '4!0 68 ON 

our pue

HON 8E1
 10 S unossin

11299 OW
