Jplin

March
April 2002
 Volume 14, Number 2

Published bimonthly by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
 www.nicar.org


Bits & Bytes 



Data updates: The IRE and NICAR Database Library has recently updated the following databases: 

MAUDE 

IRE and NICAR in early March updated its copy of the Manu- facturer and User Facility De- vice Experience database, from the U.S. Food and Drug Admin- istration, just as doctors in Bal- timore and officials with another federal agency criticized a manufacturer for a faulty medi- cal device. The MAUDE data includes information about prob- lems that occurred with medical devices. Current as of 2001. 

Home mortgages 

This database includes a record of mortgage applications, in- cluding demographic informa- tion about loan applicants, in- cluding race, sex and income; the purpose of the loan; whether the buyer intends to live in the home; the type of loan; and the outcome of the loan application. 

The dataset also includes geo- graphical information on appli- cants, such as Census tract, metropolitan statistical area, state and county. Current as of 2000. 

TERRORISM 

Building it from scratch: WTC victim database 

By Paul Overberg and Anthony DeBarros, USA Today 

continued on page 2 

Some of the best databases are not the ones you buy or acquire through FOIA but the ones you build yourself, one fact at a time. That's what USA Today found when it set out to chronicle the thousands of lives lost in the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11. The result was several stories that effec- 

tively challenged official reports of the death toll, as well as a major enterprise story that chronicled the last moments inside the World Trade Center. 

On Sept. 12, USA Today's four data- base editors huddled to catch their breath and draw up a CAR-based plan. continued on page 18 



SPOTLIGHT: WORKPLACE Mining workplace data By David Herzog, NICAR and Missouri School of Journalism 

A quick scan of your daily paper or network news program shows that workplace woes are big news: Enron, once a little-known energy company, now is a household word. Workers - and not just at Enron - are fretting about the health of their employer- backed retirement savings plans. 

In this issue of Uplink, we focus on workplace data. Stephanie Armour of USA Today recounts how she used computer-assisted-reporting's most basic tool - the spreadsheet - to build her own database of cases of immi- grant maids being abused by their employers. In another article, Armour shares some reporting ideas and data 

SPOTLIGHT: FOR MORE ON WORKPLACE SEE: 

Following the riverboat pilots, p. 2 
Immigrant employee abuse, p. 4 
Workplace data resources, p. 6 
Beware of OSHA data, p. 7 

sources that you can use to scruti- nize employers and suspect work- place practices. 

Over the years, many journalists have plunged into the massive enforcement database kept by the federal Occupa- tional Safety and Health Administra- tion, only to come up gasping for air. Ron Nixon, the national trainer for IRE 

continued on page 26


IRE Database Library 573.884.7711 

Bits & Bytes continued from page 1 



Trucks 

The truck accidents database consists of accidents that in- volve commercial vehicles that weigh more than 10,000 pounds, as reported by state transportation agencies to the U.S. Department of Transporta- tion. The vehicles included in this database are buses, semis, moving trucks, rental trucks and hazardous-material carriers. Current as of 2000. 

Fatal accidents 

The latest updated Fatal Acci- dent Reporting System data- base consists of three relational tables, containing data on au- tomobile accidents on public U.S. roads that resulted in the death of one or more people within 30 days of the accident. 

In the past, the NICAR data files were available in four relational tables. For the current update, NICAR used SAS software to replicate the data tables used by the Department of Transpor- tation and translated those tables into DBF format, which can be opened by almost any database manager software. 

In the latest data update, SAS translates the official DOT codes to plain English in the data tables. Covers 1975-2000. 

For more information about the database library's collection, including purchase prices, go to www.ire.org/datalibrary/data- bases/. To order data, contact NICAR at 573-884-7711 or download an order form at www.ire.org/datalibrary/ orderform/orderform.pdf. 

SPOTLIGHT: WORKPLACE 

Following the riverboat pilots 

By Jeffrey Meitrodt, The New Orleans Times-Picayune 

Teal Grue was the poster boy for our lead story about what's wrong with Louisiana's archaic system of selecting and overseeing Mississippi River pilots. 

Grue dropped out of high school after 10th grade. He pleaded guilty to drunk driving in 1990. He tested positive for marijuana in 1998 and was forced into drug rehab. And he didn't get his first maritime license until 1999, less than two years before his father helped him join the elite ranks of Louisiana's river pilots. 

We didn't write about Teal Grue because someone tipped us off. His stunning re- sume was simply one of many we re- 

Mississippi upset a lot of people. So did the rest of "River Barons," a four- day series by maritime reporter Keith Darce and myself that started running in The Times-Picayune on Nov. 4, 2001. State legislators have called on the governor to hold a special session to deal with the issue in 2002. The gov- ernor, who stayed out of previous re- form efforts, has finally agreed that the system needs fixing. 

We didn't think the issue was that pro- vocative last spring, when we first de- cided to take a look at the people who guide foreign-flag vessels along the Mississippi River. At the time, we 



college
1 education	ed notes	degree	grad date	arrested	convicted	crime notes
college grad	yes	5/1/1999	no	|no
some college	1 year college	ine	no	no
high school grad	no	no	no
high school grad	no	no	Ino
some college	2 yrs college	no	no	no
college grad	1 year law school	yes	12/22/1995	no	no
high school grad	ino	no	no
high school grad	ine	ine	ne
10	high school grad	no	no	no
11	didn't grad HS	GED (finished 10th grade)	(no	no	ine	denied all crime data
12	some college	1.5 yrs college	(no	yes	yes	admitted to two DWI convictions
13	college grad	master's degree	yes	8/20/1999	no	no
14	high school grad	Inc	(no	Inc
15	didn't grad HS	GED (finished 10th grade)	no	no	no
16	didn't grad HS	GED (didn't finish HS, got GEI no	yes	no	charged with "concealed weapon" age
17	high school grad	ine	(no	no
18	didn't grad HS	GED (finished 10th grade)	(no	no	no
19	didn't grad HS	GED (didn't finish HS, got GEl'no	yes	Inc	lied about arrest; outstanding warrant
20	didn't grad HS	GED (didn't finish HS, got GElno	yes	yes	lied about arrests



viewed and typed into an Excel spread- sheet after The Times-Picayune decided to investigate what some believe is the ultimate good-old-boys club in Louisiana. 

River pilots have one of the most dan- gerous jobs in the state. They operate on the most treacherous waterway in North America. And under state law, they are free to elect and regulate themselves - a privilege shared by none of their peers in the United States. 

The idea of Teal Grue steering a 100,000-ton oil tanker down the lower 

wanted to find out if two rumors were true: that Louisiana pilots are some of the highest paid mariners in the coun- try and that widespread nepotism makes it virtually impossible for non- relatives to join the ranks. 

Getting started 

The first task was relatively easy. Since their pay is typically decided by a public agency, pilot compensation is a matter of public record in many states. To fill in the blanks, we called around to various pilot groups and interviewed experts who had conducted compensation studies. 

2


Mar Apr 2002


Uplink 

We found out that Louisiana pilots, who earned about $321,000 each last year, were near the top of the heap. 

The second task was much harder. Un- like most states, which regulate pilots through independent state agencies, Louisiana leaves that job to the pilots themselves. That means that most of the records we needed to document the prevalence of nepotism, and inves- tigate other pilot practices, were in the hands of the pilots, who are legally con- sidered state officials. 

We knew that the quickest way to kill our project was to file a voluminous public-records request at the beginning of our reporting. In the past, the pilots have vigorously resisted outside scrutiny. One of the groups even refused to give a copy of its bylaws to the National Trans- portation Safety Board when the federal agency was investigating an accident involving one of the group's pilots. 

To avoid litigation, we took a low-key approach. We contacted the leaders of the three pilot groups that operate on the Lower Mississippi and asked them to help us understand what they do and why they're paid so much money. 

The groups were happy to cooperate. They had just taken a bruising in the press over the huge raises they had won from the Louisiana Public Service Commission, and they were also smart- ing from a failed legislative effort last spring to shift pilot oversight to the state. 

The pilots let us ride with them on ships, bunk at their stationhouses and interview anybody we wanted in their organiza- tions. Two months later, when we filed our first records request, the pilots were un- happy but still cooperative. By then they understood that we were as interested in what they do and how they do it as we were in nailing them for their mistakes. 

The records 

The main records we wanted from the pilots were their job applications and the accident reports they filled out if one of their ships clipped a bridge or smashed into a fleet of barges. 

None of the pilot records were avail- able electronically. We wound up with six boxes of documents, and it took us about three weeks to type everything we needed into Excel spreadsheets. 

In the past, the pilots have vigorously resisted outside scrutiny. 

The applications were rich with reveal- ing personal information. All applicants were required to furnish a birth certifi- cate, and many were also asked to supply the names of their siblings and spouses. That proved invaluable in documenting nepotism, as well as tracking campaign contributions (many of which were made by pilot wives). To help us summarize the data, we added yes/no fields indicating whether an applicant's father was a pilot, or whether any other family member was a pilot. 

The results were irrefutable: Of the 100 people elected to become river pilots in recent years, 85 are related to other pi- lots, with some able to trace their family connections back five or six generations. 

The applications also yielded surpris- ing information about the criminal and educational backgrounds of many of those selected to become pilots. We created separate, standardized fields for each type of data. On education, for instance, we used four descriptive phrases: "didn't grad HS," "HS grad," "some college," "college grad." Anything interesting, like the fact that someone dropped out of school after 10th grade, we threw into an all-purpose "notes" field. 

The analysis 

We analyzed the data using both Ex- cel and Access. If we wanted to know, for example, the number of people ar- rested for drunk driving, we'd export the spreadsheet containing application data into Access and run a query to count the number of applicants ar- 

rested for DWI. If we just wanted to find an example of someone with a DWI, we would sort the data in Excel by a yes/ no field and look at the "notes" column to see who provided the best anecdote. 

Adding that kind of summary informa- tion to the spreadsheets saved us time, since we didn't have to go back and look at all of the hard records every time we wanted to find an example for a story. 

We also added a field showing the num- ber of years an applicant had been work- ing in the maritime business. This wasn't a question on the form, but we could calculate the figure by looking at various records (resumes, character references, etc.) contained in the application file. This made it possible for us to prove that win- ning candidates were invariably less ex- perienced than the outsiders who tried to break into the organizations. 

Surprising results 

One of the most unexpected findings of our serious involved pilot discipline. Originally, we didn't think public safety would be a major factor in the series. But to make sure we didn't miss any- thing important, we asked the groups to provide accident and pilot miscon- duct records, which are investigated and judged by the pilots themselves. 

The files were a mess. Names were frequently abbreviated, and rarely spelled the same way twice. To solve dirty data problems, and make it pos- sible for us to combine data from vari- ous spreadsheets, we assigned each pilot a unique identification number. That made it easy analyze the data - to calculate, for instance, which pilot had the most collisions on the river. 

The records contained several bomb- shells. First, we discovered that two pilots were allowed to keep their jobs after testing positive for cocaine use in 2000. Second, we found that one group racked up nearly 100 accidents yet failed to discipline a single pilot in a decade - a fact that dismayed even the group's staunchest supporters in Louisiana. 

Considering that there is an average 

continued on page 4 

Mar Apr 2002


3


IRE Datebase Library 573.884.7711 

COMING IN JUNE

think

SMALL


Interested in news about America's growth engine: Small Business? 

Please join SABEW for our second Small Business Reporting Workshop on June 13-15 at Wyndham Miami Beach Resort. 

Registration fee is $50 and includes housing, conference materials, meals, field trips and writing critique. Minority scholarships available. 

Hurry! Attendance is limited. Details at www.sabew.org 

SABEW


Society of American Business Editors and Writers, Inc. 

Workshop underwritten by the Kauffman Center for Entrepreneurial Leadership at The Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation 

tracking continued from page 9 

person. An interesting side note was that all of the spouses we found listed "homemaker" in the occupation field. 

By doing these painstaking queries found things my initial match missed. For example, I had an executive listed as J. Clifford Baxter (the one who later killed himself). In the FEC data he's listed as John C. Baxter. The join query I did would not find this. In ad- dition, some of the executives listed other corporations as their employ- ers. Further research revealed these were the correct people and often the other company was a subsidiary of Enron or worked closely with them (e.g. Vinson & Elkins law firm). 

Once I had flagged all of the contri- butions made by the Enron execu- tives, I pulled this chunk out of the data and started the analysis. We asked all kinds of questions: How much went to Bush? Who were the other big recipients? How much in soft money? How much in hard money? (Full disclosure: We ulti- mately used soft money figures from the Center for Responsive Politics Web site.) 

Because of time constraints, we chose not to hunt down all contribu- tions from Enron employees. This would have required far more time because of the dirty data issues noted above. We did the entire analysis and reporting in five days - which in- cluded three solid days of data analy- sis and checking. 

Fast results, response 

The data work for this story was not difficult, just a little time-consuming. I used Visual FoxPro for most of the work (since that is what I'm most com- fortable with), but then kept track of results in Excel. I then used the spreadsheet for figuring percentages and totals. It was also a good way for me to have results readily available for when reporters John Dunbar and 

Robert Moore or editor Bill Allison needed to see what was going on. 

The results of our story were swift and exciting. The day after we posted the story on our Web site, Attorney General John Ashcroft re- cused himself from the investiga- tion after Sen. Henry Waxman showed him our story saying he had received $55,000 from Enron. 

MaryJo Sylwester, formerly the IRE and NICAR Data Library administrator, can be reached by e-mail at imsylwester@publicintegrity.org 

readme.txt 

The Center for Public Integrity's Enron stories are available at www.public-i.org 

The first story, which documented campaign contributions and stock sales by executives, is specifically located at www.public-i.org/ story_01_010902.htm 

Where to get FEC data 

NICAR: www.ire.org/datalibrary/fec FEC: www.fec.gov/finance/newftp1.htm FECInfo: www.tray.com (subscription required) 

You can also search campaign finance data at 

FEC: http://herndon1.sdrdc.com/ fecimg/query.html 

Center for Responsive Politics: www.opensecrets.org 

The National Institute on Money in State Politics lets you search for state campaign finance data at: www.followthemoney.org 

10


Mar Apr 2002


Uplink 

TERRORISM 

How data can correct government stats 

By Mark Fazlollah and Peter Nicholas, Philadelphia Inquirer 

There was quick action when the Phila- delphia Inquirer reported that the Depart- ment of Justice had dramatically over- stated its record of convicting terrorists, with conservative and liberal congress- men calling for an investigation. 

The December story, which docu- mented a five-year pattern of inflated terrorism statistics, went unchallenged by the Justice Department. The U.S. attorney's office in San Francisco, which had one of the worst records of pumping up the stats, acknowledged almost immediately that its numbers were wrong. 

Among San Francisco cases of sup- posed terrorism were: the Mexican immigrant who concocted a phony passport application; the babbling man who walked into an FBI office and threatened to kill former President Bill Clinton - though he didn't realize Clinton was no longer president; the woman who totally lost it on a flight from Australia and demanded that the stew- ardess bring her the Virgin Mary (not to be confused with a Bloody Mary) 

It was terribly tedious, but it produced results. 

There were many other run-of-the- mill criminal cases that federal pros- ecutors were listing as terrorism. And the misinformation was going to Con- gress and the public. 

Misrepresenting figures 

"Where they were misrepresenting those figures of the terrorists con- victed, it shows they may be lying to the Congress of the United States, 

and those responsible for that should be removed from office," Rep. Dan Burton, R-Ind., chairman of the Com- mittee on Government Reform said in a news conference called in re- sponse to the Inquirer story. 

Burton's committee pulled the General Accounting Office into the battle to get an accurate accounting of terrorism cases. The GAO says its investigation probably will be ready in this spring. 

Here's how we got the story: 

Our basic data came from Syracuse University's Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse. 

Each year TRAC gets raw Justice De- partment data and markets it in a highly useable form. The Justice Department organizes all federal cases into differ- ent criminal categories ranging from bribery to brutality and from white-col- lar crime to witness intimidation. And there is terrorism. 

The justice data was complete up to Sept. 30, but it did not include the names of defendants or their federal court case numbers. 



Finding a sample 

To get that, we paired the justice in- formation with federal court data of- fered through the Public Access to Court Electronic Records (PACER). This is a commercial service but the charges are reasonable - often only 25 cents to electronically access a full court docket for an individual case. The pairing is painfully time consum- ing and best suited to small sam- plings of cases. 

readme.txt 

The justice data listed only 463 cases of terrorism. We further reduced the number of cases by focusing only on 

About the data 

The Transactional Records Access Clearinghouse (TRAC) is a data gathering, data research and data distribution organization associated with Syracuse University. 

Established in 1989 as a research center at Syracuse, it also has offices in Washington, D.C. 

TRAC provides comprehensive data about federal staffing, spending, and the enforcement activities of the federal government. Its service TRACFED allows journalists to explore the database of U.S. attorneys' cases, reported by the Justice Department. 

For more about TRAC, go to trac.syr.edu 

federal convictions that were labeled as terrorism cases. 

The common denominators in the two data systems are the dates of filing criminal charges, the federal court dis- tricts in which the cases are filed and the lead criminal charges. 

PACER allowed us to select all cases filed on a specific date in any federal court district. For each federal district, we entered the date of each Justice Department's terrorism case. 

Digging into files 

The northern district of California, for example, had 14 convictions over a five-year period, requiring us to review the electronic docket information for ev- ery case on each of the 14 days. 

It was terribly tedious, but it pro- duced results. 

Usually, there were no more than a dozen criminal cases filed on a single day. Of those, there usually would be 

continued on page 12 

Mar Apr 2002


11


visit our www.nicar.org 

readme.txt


Stories 

The stories mentioned in this edition of Uplink will soon be available from the IRE Resource Center. Search the story database at www.ire.org/resourcecenter for order numbers. Call 573-882- 3364 to order these and other investigative stories. 

Databases 

To view the list of databases available at the IRE and NICAR Data Library, view the Web site www.ire.org/datalibrary. From this page, you can also download an order form. The library's telephone number is 573-884-7711. 

Tech tips 

Have you found a technical solution that saves you time? Share it as an Uplink Tech Tip, a story of 500-1,000 words showing a technique that you'd be willing to share. Please contact Managing Editor Jeff Porter at jeff@nicar.org or by telephone at 573-882-1982. 

Training material 

For a calendar of IRE and NICAR training events, visit the Web page www.ire.org/training/otr.html. 

Tipsheets 

data continued from page 11 

The IRE Resource Center offers a searchable database of tipsheets for journalists at www.ire.org/resourcecenter. Many are downloadable, or call 573-882-3364 to order tipsheets. 

only one with the specific criminal charge matching the Justice Depart- ment data. 

There were additional checks we used to ensure we identified the right cases. PACER gave us the names of the judge and federal prosecutor in each case. The Justice data provided the initials of the judge and prosecutor. Once we had the name of the defendants, we could look for news articles that had been written by local papers. 

We contacted defense lawyers, who were shocked that the Justice Depart- ment was classifying their clients' cases as terrorism. They faxed us cop- ies of indictments and other court records. Reporters from our sister Knight Ridder papers pulled court files for us in several federal districts. 

Reactions, examples 

Confronted with the results of our re- search, some federal prosecutors were willing to discuss cases. We also reached out to FBI agents that investigated them. 

In one supposed case of terrorism in Se- attle, two commercial pilots were feuding. 

Pilot Eugene Allen tried to hurt the other's career by sending authorities a phony report that the pilot was plan- ning a hijacking. Officials quickly called in the FBI's anti-terrorism unit in Seattle. 

The lead FBI agent, who worked three years with the anti-terrorism task force, cracked the case in two weeks. He got a confession from Allen, who eventu- ally pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges and was sentenced to a brief period of probation. 

Reality of terrorism 

The agent told us this was his "only real case of terrorism" in three years. Even after Sept. 11, he didn't understand the reality of terrorism. 

ing problem we uncovered. 

Perhaps that was the most disturb- 

Now Congress wants to know how per- vasive the problem is. 

Other ways the data can be used: The same test that we did with the Justice Department's terrorism reporting can be done with other categories of crimes. 

For example, are federal environmen- tal enforcement prosecutions hitting big polluters or only getting small fish? Was it a mechanic who accidentally dumped a barrel of oil or was it a petro- leum company that polluted Houston bay? 

The same can be done for analyzing enforcement of organized crime cases, anti-trust cases, medical fraud, money laundering or any other category of fed- eral prosecution. 

Even for large categories of cases, such as drug enforcement, reporters can do sampling. 

Mark Fazlollah can be reached by e-mail at mfazlollah@phillynews.com. 

Peter Nicholas can be reached by e-mail at pnicholas@krwashington.com. 

Pen & Sword A Journalist's Guide to Covering the Military 

Let veteran reporter Ed Offley be your guide to the military beat. Offley has covered military issues and conflicts for The Seattle Post- Intelligencer, The Stars and Stripes and other publications for more than 20 years. 

PEN & SWORD


Offley's clear,concise writing in Pen & Sword will help you understand: 

Military basics all reporters should know 
How to organize a military beat 
Protocol for interviewing military personnel 
How to go into the field with military units 
How to deal with the Pentagon 
How to prepare for war 
How to cover the defense industry 

$24.95. Softcover, 304 pages. ISBN 0-9665176-44 

Order on-line: www.marionstreetpress.com or call Ed Avis at 708-445-8330. 



Marion Street Press, Inc., P.O. Box 2249, Oak Park, IL 60303 

Mar Apr 2002


12


Uplink


From the Lists


Listserv messages you may have missed between members of NICAR-L. Census-L and IREplus-L To learn about joining these mailing lists and searching their archives visit www.ire.org/membership/listserv.html 

Downloading with FTP 

Q: What does using FTP soft- ware do for you in downloading that simply right-clicking and sav- ing doesn't? 

A: I had some problems down- loading files through Netscape; when I started using the FTP cli- ent, not only did those problems disappear, but I also started see- ing about 30 percent faster down- load times. It also allows you to select an entire set of files to down- load, rather than right-clicking on them one at a time. If it's just one file, I'd probably right-click on it, too. If it's a set like the 40 per-state SF- 1 census files from last summer, right-clicking gets a little tiresome. 

SPSS and Excel 

Q: I don't use SPSS and know nothing about it. But I want to tell someone who has some data in SPSS how to give it to me in Excel (I'm not sure they know for sure how). 

A: File/Save As/Excel ought to do it, as long as the SPSS table doesn't have more variables or cases (i.e., columns or rows) than Excel can handle. 

Copying import specs 

Q: I was under the impression that you could export or somehow copy import specifications be- tween Access databases, but I can't remember how to do it nor find any way to do it in the help file. Can someone explain how to do it or point me to the relevant help entry? 
A: Open the database to which you want to add the import specs. Go to File, Get External Data, Import. Then select the database that contains the im- port specs you want. On the im- port dialogue window, click the button labeled Options. Check the box labeled Import/Export Specs. Then click OK. It won't seem like anything happened, but the specs should be in the new database. 

Summarizing with maps 

Q: I need help creating a dot- density map. I have a point (dot) theme. Let's say each dot rep- resents a single crime in the county. And I have a census tract theme. How do I assign the dots to their respective tracts and then tell ArcView to show me one dot for, say, every 50 in each tract? 

A: If I understand, you already have a dot density map with one dot per crime, but want to aggre- gate it by tract and restate it as 1 dot per 50 crimes If this is the case, you want to take you're joined table and click on the sum- marize button, which is a Sigma this will start a dialog box, through which you want to select your Tractid field and Summarize by Count. What you'll end up with is a dbf that has: 

tract 1 504 tract 2 444 

Then you can add this new dbf table and join it to your original tract theme and make a dot den- sity map (double-click on the theme and pick dot density in- stead of graduated value) 

Splitting those names 

Q: I have a "name" field in an Access table I need to separate. The names appear like: SMITH, JOHN DAVID. I need to get the individual names in to different columns via update query... simply tell Access to put all characters before the comma in the first new field (lastname), and all remaining characters after the comma into a second new field (restname). 

A: Use instr() to find the com- mas. Something like this: 

Left(name,instr(",")-1) for the last name. Mid(name, instr(",")+1) for the rest. 

continued on page 15 

Mar Apr 2002


13


IRE Database 573.884.7711 

ONLINE Handy Internet resources for reporters 

John Tedesco, San Antonio Express-News 

What kinds of Internet sites are be- ing bookmarked these days by web- savvy reporters? 

I asked members of NICAR's listserv recently for the most help- ful sites they've come across and quickly learned that journalists have staked out interesting and in- formative territory on the World Wide Web. 

The listserv itself, and the replies received, became an example of the Internet's growing importance to the media. The right URL address can lead to aviation accident reports, campaign contribution databases, people finders, material safety data sheet repositories, tax records for charities and prison inmate tracking systems, to name a few. 

The Web for journalists 

I used the suggestions for a presenta- tion I gave about how the Internet can help journalists. Here are some of the Web sites we talked about: 

Listervs: www.liszt.com/-The place to locate e-mail discussion groups. 

Newsgroups: www.groups.google.com/ - Formerly called Deja News, this newsgroup archive was acquired by the Google search engine and covers just about every topic. 

Experts: www.profnet.com - A way to find experts online in a variety of fields. Profnet is now requiring jour- nalists to register before they search the database of experts, but registra- tion is free. 

Health: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/- Look up abstracts from medical studies. 

Courts: http://pacer.uspci.uscourts.gov 

- Federal court records at your finger- tips. Recent cases offer access to the actual court documents. 

Lawyers: http://lawyers.martindale .com/xp/Martindale/home.xml - Track down lawyers in any part of the coun- try and even outside the United States. 

Charities: www.guidestar.org - The nonprofit group Philanthropic Re- search, Inc. helps donors research other charities. Look up financial infor- mation and 990 tax forms that nonprofits file with the IRS. 

Type in some keywords, use the control key to select which fields you want to search, and GPO does the work for you. 

Worker safety: www.osha.gov/cgi-bin/ est/est1 - OSHA offers a large data- base of company safety violations. 

Airline crashes: http://nasdac.faa.gov/ asp/fw_ntsb.asp - Using an aircraft's N-number or serial number, you can find out whether a plane has experi- enced past problems. 

Government records: www.access. gpo.gov/su_docs/aces/aaces 002.html - The Government Printing Office offers a slow but neat way to conduct keyword searches across multiple federal databases. Type in some keywords, use the control key to select which fields you want to 

search, and GPO does the work for you. Includes access to bills and Con- gressional reports. 

Statistics: www.fedstats.gov - An easy-to-use clearinghouse for a vari- ety of federal figures. 

Internet: www.netsol.com/cgi-bin/ whois/whois - Need to know who's behind an Internet site? Type their Web address and find out. 

Politics: www.opensecrets.org - One of many places to look up how much money politicians are raising and who is giving to them. 

Open records: www.rcfp.org/tapping/ index.cgi - Find out what records are public in any state. 



Chemicals: www.msdssearch.com - A repository of material safety data sheets. 

Inmates: www.bop.gov/ - Use this site to locate federal prisoners. 

The Web by journalists 

Some of the best sites on the Internet are maintained by reporters and re- searchers. Among them: 

Investigative Reporters and Editors: www.ire.org - Offers tip sheets, story abstracts and resources to members. Check the listserv archive to see if your topic has been discussed. Also offers a compilation of web sites at www.ire.org/training and breaks down sites by beat at www.ire.org/ resourcecenter/initial-search beat.html. 

The Journalist's Toolbox: www.journaliststoolbox.com/ 

Power Reporting: www.powerreporting.org 

A Journalist's Guide to the Internet: http://reporter.umd.edu 

Assignment Editor: www.assignmenteditor.com/ 

Fast Facts: http://gwu.edu/~gprice/handbook.htm 

14


Mar Apr 2002


Uplink


The Reporter's Desktop: www.reporter.org/desktop/ 

Deadline Online: www.deadlineonline.com 

To learn more 

Search Engine Watch: http://searchenginewatch.com/ Journalist Danny Sullivan reviews search engines and offers good tips. Sign up for his e-mail newsletter. 

The same kind of web site, with e-mail newsletters, can be found at Research Buzz: www.researchbuzz.com/, by Tara Calishain. 

Scout Report: http://scout.cs.wisc.edu/ index.html-Researchers at the Univer- sity of Wisconsin-Madison seek out au- thoritative Web sites in a variety of fields and make their recommenda- tions available to anyone. Browse their archives and subscribe to their free, weekly e-mail. 

Web Search FAQ: www.infotoday.com/ searcher/oct01/price.htm-Gary Price at George Washington University has useful web pages for journalists and wrote this article about using search engines to your advantage. 

Pandia: www.pandia.com/ - Reviews search engines, highlights their advan- tages and disadvantages. 

IRE: www.ire.org - Look up tip sheets about mining the World Wide Web for information. 

Good Internet advice for reporters can be found outside the electronic realm. A Journalist's Guide to the Internet, by Christopher Callahan, and Find it Online, by Alan M. Schlein, were written by journalists whose sites are mentioned above. Super Searchers in the News, by Paula J. Hane, is a book of interviews with reporters and news researchers who talk about how they search the World Wide Web. 

From the Lists


John Tedesco can be reaced by e-mail at jtedesco@express-news.com 

continued from page 13 

Looking at test scores 

Q: I'm currently helping the edu- cation reporter with the state school scores released to the media yes- terday. I would like to know what would be the best approach to cal- culate every district's score on each category, English, language and arts. The same with science. The education reporter received the results on an Excel table. I was thinking about basic math: adding all the percentages and then divid- ing them by the number of schools on each district. 

A: A better approach might be to calculate a WEIGHTED aver- age. To do that, multiply the av- erage for each school by the number of kids who took the test, add those numbers to- gether, then divide by the total number of kids. 

Deleting the right records 

Q: I'm trying to write a query in SQL Server 7.0 to delete some data. I have two tables, each of which has the same unique code field. I want to de- 

lete from Table1 all the rows where the code matches the code field in Table2, but every wording I try gives me an error. 

A: Try: Delete from table 1 where uniqueid in (select uniqueid from table2) 

Space, memory problem 

Q: I'm trying to change the date field from text to a date and it worked fine on a smaller dataset. Now, on a much larger dataset, I get this: "Microsoft Access can't change the data type. There isn't enough disk space or memory." Funny, I have more than 30 gigs of free space and 256 megs of RAM. Seems that would be plenty to change a stinking date field. What gives? Anyone got any ideas? I have workarounds aplenty at my disposal, but seems like I should be able to attack this head on without hav- ing to leave Access. 

A: Although your database may be on a drive with 30 gigs of free space, Access may be using another drive for the TEMP files it creates. To change the folder used by Access, go to control panels and double click on the "System" icon. Go to the "Environment" tab, and you will see which folders are set for TMP and TEMP files. Just change the folder settings to a folder on the drive with all the room and you should be all set. 

Mar Apr 2002


15


Visit www.nicar.org 

CONFERENCE San Francisco 2002 By Gina Bramucci, IRE and NICAR 



Reporters and editors are bound for the City by the Bay this year for the IRE National Conference, May 30- June 2. The conference has become an invaluable tradition for newsrooms around the country, offering journal- ists the chance to enrich their skills through workshops and panel discus- sions featuring top-notch investiga- tive reporters. 

The IRE conference comes at a cru- cial moment in journalism. With na- tional security high on the public agenda, reporters and editors are fac- ing increasing challenges to freedom of information. The San Francisco con- ference will present beat basics, while giving special attention to the major stories and information access issues that have emerged in the past year. 

Panels will highlight the best investiga- tive journalism from around the nation, delving into energy regulation and deregu- 

You're invited 

to the Education Writers Association's 2002 National Semimar: 

"Whose Truths? Perspectives, Perceptions & the Public Good" 

April 25-27, 2002 Washington, D.C. Wyudham City Center 

Explore the ethics of covering testing and accountability, learn about observing classrooms, evaluating research, tackling large projects, changing demographics, & more! Call 202.452.9830, visit www.ewa.org. 

EWA

NationalEducationWritersAssociation


lation, immigration, military and defense issues and campaign finance reform. In light of the high-profile collapse of Enron and the Kmart bankruptcy, attendees also can expect tips on using business docu- ments and covering corporate fraud. 

This year's conference will integrate in- temational journalists into panels more than ever before. "The issues we cover have clearly become global," said Brant Houston, IRE's executive director. "IRE is expanding and building on the network of journalists helping each other." 

With the San Francisco Chronicle as a local host, the conference location also will allow for greater focus on cover- age of diversity, said Houston. "A great thing about San Francisco is the diver- sity of the media in scope, ethnicity and approach," he said. 

Nuts, bolts and more 

In addition, the always-popular present- ers Donald Barlett and James Steele will make another appearance this year, sharing what they've learned in more than three decades of prize-winning in- vestigative journalism. (Note their story on the Olympics in the March-April 2002 issue of The IRE Journal.) 

Fast-track sessions aimed at print, broadcast and online journalists will de- liver the nuts and bolts of beat report- ing-offering tips for backgrounding in- dividuals and for covering schools, businesses, city halls and courts. 

On Thursday, panels dedicated to com- puter-assisted reporting will help jour- nalists learn and fine-tune their CAR skills. Veteran reporters will collaborate with NICAR staff to tackle issues re- lated to the criminal justice system, as well as campaign finance, the latest census releases, mapping and geo- graphical information systems. 

readme.t 

Other panels devoted to computer-as- 

Tipsheets 

The IRE Resource Center offers a searchable database of tipsheets for journalists at www.ire.org/resourcecenter or call 573-882-3364 to order tipsheets. 

sisted reporting will include: 

The converging investigation: TV, print and Web together 
The 20 databases you need to have 
Air security and safety 
Early warning systems: Data on fail- ing infrastructures 
Immigration and labor safety 
Military and defense 
Public health 
Environment and energy 

As always, the winners and finalists of the IRE Awards will be announced on Saturday. The awards presentation is an occasion for IRE to pay tribute to the best investigative reporting from 2001. 

On Sunday, speakers will expand the work they did last year to help report- ers strengthen their skills and build their careers. 

Elections, registration 

Each year, IRE addresses membership business during the conference. Elec- tions for board of director seats will take place on Saturday, June 1. Members can request an absentee ballot if un- able to attend the conference. (See more detail in the March-April 2002 of The IRE Journal.) A separate election for IRE Awards contest judges will take place im- mediately following board elections. 

The conference will be held at the San Francisco Hyatt Regency. Members can register online at www.ire.org/training/ sanfran/ or photocopy the form found in this issue of Uplink. Hotel reservations can be made by calling the Hyatt Re- gency at 415-788-1234 or 800-233-1234. 

Gina Bramucci can be reached by e-mail at gina@ire.org 

16


Mar Apr 2002


Uplink 

Tech tips Automating parsing 

By Ron Nixon, IRE and NICAR 

data, trying to write a program to clean A parsing program that had gotten at- 

A few years back while I was a re- porter at the Roanoke (Va.) Times, I came across a problem in a database that confounded me for days. I'd been given a database with names in it spelled hundreds of different ways: first, comma, last; last, comma, first; first, 

and parse names and addresses. 

Other programs 

One of my favorites programs, NameChop, is available for free from Semaphore Corp.'s Website. Sema- 



Spotter [Demo apiri
File Edit Verw Insert Format Records Tools Window Help
in	IFC	91	H	X
Difficult names	Arial	10	B	I	U	3	A	,	-	0
Difficult names to split	sPrefix	sFirst	sMiddle	et Last	Suffix
D/M Stephen Michael St.John Jr. Ph.D	D/M	Stephen	Michael	St,John	Jr. Ph.D.
Leonard Bark - Jones ESQ.	Leonard	Bark-Jones	ESQ.
Dr. Michael D. Downer D.D.S.	Dr.	Michael	ID.	Downer	D.D.S.
Mr Thomas	Mr	Thomas
Lt. Col. Roger J. Wagner III	Lt. Col.	Roger	J.	Wagner	III
mR mARTIN aLISTAIR dE La RUE Ph.D	Mr	Martin	Alistair	de la Rue	PH.D.
GREG MILLER-ADSHEAD B.A. Dip. Ed.	Greg	Mitler-Adshead	B.A. Dip. Ed.
00000000JOSHOSTEVENSOJNR	Josh	Stevens	Jnr
WALK#HER SUE	@@@%%%	Sue	Walker
MRS TIMOTHY JOHN ARTHUR VON BUEREN	Mrs	Timothy	John Arthur	von Bueren
Abraham, F Murray
F	Murray	Abraham
Anderson David K	David	IK	Anderson
Freddie The Mangler" Simonds	Freddie	"The Mangler"	Simonds
McDoe, ROBERT A.	Robert	A	McDoe
SIR WALTER JOHN RAYMOND BETTS, SNR	Sir	Walter	John Raymond	Betts	Snr
OSCAR DE LA HOYA	Oscar	de la Hoya
MR C. J. TILLMAN BOAM IN	Mr	C.	J.	TILLMAN-Board III
MR & MRS JACK & JILL MC HILL	Mr & Mrs	Jack And Jill	Mc Hill
Mr Rob Smith-Jones	Mr	Rob	Smith-Jones
Mr Art P van der Lay	Mr	Art	P	ivan der Lay
MCDOE, MICHAEL S.	Michael	S.	McDoe
Harry o'Gorman	Harry	'Gorman
Ms Nina D'Aquino	Ms	Nina	D'Aquino



space, last; etc. It was a parsing night- mare. After a few days of writing string functions until I was blue in the face, I gave up. Then someone mentioned that there was probably existing soft- ware that could help with my problem. 

They were right. After searching the Web I found a little program called Splitter made for Microsoft Access da- tabases. The program not only splits names no matter how they are en- tered into a database, it also guesses the gender and will create a new table leaving your original table alone. The program, made by Australian Terry Chapman, costs about $40 and is easily downloaded. 

Splitter is not alone. There are liter- ally dozens of shareware packages out that that nearly eliminate the need to spend countless hours poring over 

phore is a company that cleans mail- ing lists. NameChop works on dbf and text files. You create additional fields in your table with first, last, middle initial, suffixes and prefixes and let it rip. The program takes a few seconds and your data problems are gone. In addition to NameChop, Semaphore also gives away DupeDetect, a program that lets you flag duplicate records by selection criteria to match on like first name, last name and Zip Code, etc. The program then flags the duplicates and gives you the option to delete them. 

Another program that works fairly well at parsing files is McXtract, made by Pierre R. Geevers, a programmer from Nantes, France. The program allows you to import text files in various for- mats and parse out information. I've only tried the demo, but it seems to work pretty well with big text files. 

tention on the IRE listserv for parsing is ParseRat. The program costs about $50 and not only parses names, but does addresses as well. According to ParseRat's Web site, it can read most files types and export many file types as well. There is a demo that can be downloaded for 30 days. 

Programmers in the open source movement have also developed a parsing and data-cleaning program that could be useful to reporters. It's called Potters Wheel and it not only does data cleaning and name pars- ing, but statistical analysis as well. The program is available for free. 

These programs won't solve all your problems. There will still be databases that you'll come across with dirty data that is not easily cleaned. But these little programs make it easier to get to the thing we love most: analyzing the data and getting to the story. 

Ron Nixon can be reached by e-mail at ron@ire.org 

readme.txt 



Web addresses Splitter: 

www.users.bigpond.com/ wemba/splitter.htm NameChop: www.semaphorecorp.com 

McXtract: 

http://ourworld.compuserve.com/ homepages/pierregeevers/ mcx.htm 

ParseRat: www.guysoftware.com 

Potters Wheel: http://epoch.cs.berkeley.edu:8000/ ~rshankar//abc/abc-rel1.3 

Mar Apr 2002


17


IRE Database Library 573.884.7711 

Get the scoop 

2001 EDITION

The IRE Collection:
 Winning
 Investigations

Edited by
 Jamie Manfuso
 for Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc.

WINNERS AND FINALISTS FROM THE 2000 IRE AWARDS


on the year's best investigations 

The latest compilation book from IRE not only salutes the winners of the prestigious IRE Awards, it offers testimony from the winners. 

Information is shared on how the work was completed, which techniques proved most valuable and what resources were utilized to win the print, broadcast, online and other categories. A great guide for launching similar projects in your own back yard! 

IRE members: $16 each Non-members: $30 each Plus first-class postage: $4 for the first book, $2 for each additional book 

E-mail questions to rescntr@nicar.org 

ORDER NOW! 

By MAIL


Send your check to IRE: 138 Neff Annex Missouri School of Journalism Columbia, Mo. 65211 

By PHONE


Call 573-882-3364 with your VISA or MasterCard 

By WEB 

Visit our Web site at www.ire.org for online ordering or order form downloads 

20


Mar Apr 2002


Uplink 



CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

Money in - and from - the bank 



By Aron Pilhofer, IRE and NICAR 

Sometimes, the best campaign fi- nance stories happen right in your own back yard. That's what the News Journal in Wilmington, Del., discov- ered when the paper investigated a sudden upsurge in campaign spend- ing by the state's second largest em- ployer: MBNA, one of the nation's larg- est issuers of credit cards. 

Reporter Robert Long, who led the project, became interested after no- ticing an unusually large number of contributions coming from company executives. 

"After seeing MBNA ranking high in some presidential races, we started to take an in-depth look at their cam- paign activities," he said. 

Poring through FEC reports in the spring of 2000, when the paper first began its examination, the News Journal found that MBNA execu- tives were the single largest identi- fiable group of contributors to then- candidate George W. Bush's presi- dential campaign, giving more than $250,000. 

At the time, MBNA was second only to investment bank Goldman Sachs in total contributions to presidential candidates. 

Following the money 

In several follow-up articles, the News Journal documented the company's lavish campaign spending on state and national candidates and party committees throughout the 2000 election cycle. 

MBNA ended up as the most gener- ous campaign contributor among fi- nance/credit companies in 2000, giv- ing more than $3.5 million to federal candidates and committees. That's 

$1 million more than the company contributed during the previous four election cycles combined, according to the Center for Responsive Politics. 

In the course of reporting the story, the News Journal uncovered memos that showed how top MBNA executives were influencing em- ployees to contribute to candidates the company favored. 

Company executives said the firm was interested in promoting good government. But campaign-finance reform advocates said it was more than coincidental that the company's interest in national politics came at a time when an important piece of bankruptcy reform legislation was pending in Congress. 

MBNA and others in the credit indus- try had been pushing hard to make it 



TOP RECIPIENTS
Below are the politicians who have
received $18,000 or more during the 1999-
2088 campaign season from MBNA
employees and their households. This data
came from computerized and paper
campaign finance records filed with
federal and state election offices.
Recipient	Amount	Party	State
Bush, George	$243,250.00	Rep	TX
W
Burris, John	$147,400.00	Rep	DE
Ruppersberger, $107,850.00 Dem	MD
Dutch
Roth, William V $99,501.00 Rep	DE
Jr
Kasich,	John	R	$94,250.00	Rep	OH
Biden, Joseph	$62,200.00	Dem	DE
Jr
Kyl, Jon L	$27,000.00	Rep	AZ
Hutchison, Kay	$13,000.00	Rep	TX
Bailey
Baker, Richard	$10,000.00	Rep	LA
McCollum, Bill	$10,000.00	Rep	FL
LaFaice, John	$10,000.00	Rep	NY
Lott, Trent	$10,000.00	Rep	MS



readme.txt 

Story Read the MBNA story at: www. delawareonline.com/newsjournal/ archives/mbna/0312200a.html 

more difficult for those who file bank- ruptcy claims to walk away from debts they owe. Following the election, both houses of Congress passed similar bankruptcy reform bills. 

The paper also tracked MBNA's soft money donations and donations made to all of the members of con- gressional banking committees - and found a close correlation be- tween whom the company was giv- ing to and how committee members voted on bankruptcy legislation. 

Compiling the data 

The project involved compiling data from several campaign finance sources: 

To compile the federal numbers, the News Journal used raw FEC data, downloaded from the agency's Web site. 
Delaware had not yet begun comput- erizing state filings, so that data had to be typed into a database by hand. 
The paper also keyed in some data from paper filings submitted by MBNA's federal political action committee. 

As with any campaign finance project, there were problems. 

"In many of the FEC filings, MBNA was listed as an employer for MBNA employees. But in the state reports and some of the FEC re- ports, they weren't," Long said. "So we built a database of corporate officers - which we got from an- nual reports, PAC reports and other sources - compiled ad- dresses from voting records and were able to use those to match 

continued on page 22 

Mar Apr 2002


21


risit www.nicar.org 

money continued from page 21 

spouses who were also donating to Bush and other Republicans." 

Fixing the problems 

Other problems included: 
Finding executives' spouses, which involved some guesswork because the FEC does not include the full address of all contributors. The News Journal used a methodology similar to that used by the Center for Responsive Politics: Persons with the same last name; listing the same city, state and ZIP Code; contributing the same amount to the same candidate on the same day were considered related. 
Juggling many different databases, from different data sources, which made the analysis tricky. 
Managing a moving target. The pa- per constantly had to update numbers as the company made more contribu- tions, and the reporters found more ways in which MBNA was contributing. 

CAMPAIGN FINANCE 

All in all, it wasn't a pretty collection of data, Long said, "but it was accurate and got the job done." 

Students reveal gifts to legislators By Jeff C. South, Virginia Commonwealth University 

Aron Pilhofer, formerly with the News Journal, can be reached by e-mail at aron@ire.org 

In computer-assisted reporting, there's a tendency to think that bigger is bet- ter: that the more records you crunch, the more impact your story will have. 

But my Legislative Reporting students at Virginia Commonwealth University dispelled that notion last spring when they created and analyzed a relatively small database: a list of all gifts re- ceived last year by state legislators, the governor and other top officials. 

The dataset contained fewer than 1,000 records, totaling about $185,000 in gifts, taken from the conflict-of-inter- est forms officials filed in January. How- ever, the resulting stories created quite a buzz at the Capitol and, thanks to AP, resonated across the state. 

We put our stories online, with a searchable database detailing the gifts reported by each legislator. We high- lighted the biggest gifts - including trips to hunt caribou in the Arctic Circle and quail in Georgia. And we raised ethical questions: Should lawmakers be ac- cepting such freebies from businesses, interest groups and lobbyists seeking 

to influence the legislative process? 

Story can get response 

The gifts project struck a louder chord than I had expected. Stateline.org, a Web site devoted to state government issues, wrote a story about our efforts, and several journalists praised our ef- forts. Our Web site received thousands of hits - and numerous visitors sent appreciative e-mails. We got more re- sponse on our gifts package than on a much larger CAR project my spring 2000 class did on campaign contributions. 

Because that project was so time-con- suming, I planned to scale back this year. I figured the gifts project would be more manageable: We'd get the Statements of Economic Interests filed by each leg- islator, type into Excel the information about gifts, then sort and subtotal the data. 

Not terribly flashy, I thought, but the project will teach students about the importance of getting and computer- izing - public records. 

Drawing attention 

In retrospect, here are some reasons 

ICIJ Award for Outstanding International Investigative Reporting 

INTERNATIONAL CONSORTIUM 

OF INVESTIGATIVE JOURNALISTS
 A PROJECT OF THE CENTER FOR PUBLIC INTEGRITY


A $20,000 first-place prize and up to five $1,000 finalist awards aim to recognize, reward, and foster international investigative reporting. 

Journalists of any nationality working in print, broadcast and online media are eligible to apply. Books are not accepted. The work must have involved reporting in at least two countries and must have been first published or broadcast in general information media between June 1, 2001 and June 1, 2002. Deadline to apply is July 15, 2002. 

For more information on the ICIJ Award, as well as the 2001 winners and finalists, see www.icij.org or call 202-466-1300. 

22


Mar Apr 2002


Uplink 

why our package on legislative gifts drew attention - and why you might want to put such a story on your to-do list: 

Many gifts have a cachet that campaign donations don't. A lobbyist may get more ingratiating bang for the buck with a $100 
Campaign donations often are online (in Virginia, thanks to the Virginia Public Access Project [www.vpap.org]). Not so for gifts; those records had been avail- 

limits on the amount or size of gifts or cam- paign donations legislators can receive.) 



Search the legislative gifts database
VCU's Legislative Reporting class compiled a database of gifts that state legislators reported receiving during
the year 2000 The information came from the Statements of Economic Interests filed in January by each
member of the House and Senate
Legislator's last name:	jones	Search
District	Legislator	Giver's name	Description of gift	Value
H70	Jones. Dweight Clinton	Philip Morris	Holiday gift box	$113.00
Jones. Dwight Clinton	$113.00
Total
H76	Jones, S Chas	Glaxo Wellcome	dinner	$96.18
Nati Ass of Chain Drug	state ISSUES conference Palm Springs
H76	Jones, S. Chris	Stores	DA	$1,575.00
H76	Jones. S Chris	Ringling Bros: Circus	4 CHOUS tickets	$68.00



steak dinner than with a $100 or even $1,000 check to a campaign committee. In Virginia, where $5,000 campaign con- tributions are pretty common, an inter- est group could spend less money but make a bigger impression by sending a key legislator on a vacation. 

Gifts often guarantee face time with lawmakers - giving lobbyists an oppor- tunity to state their case for or against legislation. We found that legislators received $26,000 in meals and $24,000 in trips, with lobbyists usually serving as hosts. Access is the goal of most big gifts and campaign contributions, according to government watchdog groups. 
Constituents may view certain gifts more suspiciously than campaign con- tributions. People might sympathize with politicians' need for money to run for office. But they might think it's grubby for Virginia lawmakers to ac- cept free Washington Redskins tickets, golf equipment and eyeglasses things ordinary folks must pay for. 
The rules governing gifts may be looser than the rules on campaign do- nations. In Virginia, lawmakers cannot accept campaign contributions during the legislative session - but they can accept gifts any time. (Virginia has no 

able only on paper in Richmond. Our project made the gifts data available to the public for the first time over the Internet. 

How the work progressed 

If you're interested in doing a similar project in your state, first get the rules on legislative gift-giving. You can find them on the Web site of the National Conference of State Legislatures (http://www.ncsl.org/). 

Here's how we did our investigation: 

At the start of the session, we ordered copies of the Statements of Economic Interests for members of the House of Delegates (from the House Clerk's Of- fice) and for members of the Virginia Senate (from the Senate Clerk's Office). These statements, also called conflict- of-interest forms, list legislators' debts, investments, employers, real estate hold- ings and other financial information. 

We zeroed in on Schedule E, on which legislators must list all gifts of $50 or more received the previous year. We had 140 legislators to contend with (100 House members and 40 senators); the class was made up of 13 students and an in- structor. So we each took the records for 10 legislators and entered the Sched- ule E information into a spreadsheet. 

We did the data entry in Microsoft Ex- cel. For each gift, students entered the recipient's name, the giver's name, the giver's city and state, the description of the gift, the value of the gift and any notes made on the legislator's form. 

We then combined each student's data into a single spreadsheet - with all gifts on all legislators. We fixed typos and in- consistencies, especially in the spelling of donors' names. Then we analyzed the data with Excel's PivotTable Report fea- ture. This allowed us to see how much each donor had given in gifts and how much each lawmaker had received. 

Stories flow from data 

After doing the analysis, the class dis- cussed possible stories: about the top givers and recipients, about expensive or unusual gifts, about why donors give gifts to legislators. 

One student decided to write about gifts given to Gov. Jim Gilmore, Lt. Gov. John Hager (who presides over the Senate) and Attorney General Mark Earley. These officials file their State- ments of Economic Interests with the Secretary of the Commonwealth. 

After obtaining those forms, the class again divvied up the data entry so we could sort and total the top officials' gifts in Excel. (It would have been hard to do this by hand or with a calculator: Gilmore reported 337 gifts worth almost $55,500.) 

To guide us in this project, we found an article Kit Wagar of The Kansas City Star did for the September 1999 issue of Uplink. Using Excel and FoxPro, Kit had analyzed the gifts given to the Mis- souri Legislature. 

Jeff South can be reached by e-mail at jcsouth@vcu.edu 

readme.txt 

Story The URL for the package of stories on legislative gifts is: www.people.vcu.edu/~jcsouth/ on-the-lege/ 



Mar Apr 2002


23


IRE Database Library 573.884.7711 

workplace 

continued from page 1 

& NICAR in this issue offers some guid- ance for journalists who want to stay afloat while working with the OSHA data. 

These articles just touch on what you do. There are plenty of other angles that data-savvy reporters can follow. 

Pensions 

After the fall of Enron flattened out its employee retirement savings plans, heavy in company stock, St. Paul Pio- neer Press business reporter Jim McCartney turned to the web for the local angle. 

readme. txt 

Resources 

Tipsheets and stories from the IRE Resource Center can assist journalists working on similar stories. 

Tipsheet #935 

A brief overview of laws affecting workplace reporting, reviews some of the agencies that oversee employers and a listing of sources valuable to writing and producing stories about work. The packet includes a listing of Web sites designed to introduce you to government databases on workplace-related information. 

To order, call (573) 882-3364 or go to www.ire.org/resourcecenter. 

Web addresses 

Department of Labor: www.dol.gov/dol/pwba/public/ pubs/main.htm 

10k Wizard: www.10kwizard.com 

FreeERISA.com www.freeERISA.com 

McCartney wanted to see whether the retirement savings plans offered by the 15 biggest publicly-traded companies in the Twin Cities were loaded with company stock. So he turned to the 

crunching? You can obtain the entire ERISA database from the U.S. Depart- ment of Labor, and compare some 750,000 pension plans across the country. Pension plan administrators 

x

Form
5500
Annual Return/Report of Employee Benefit Plan
OMB Nos. 1210-0016
1210-0009
 Department of the Frainury
(With 100 or more participants)
 Internet Remarks Sne
 Department Labor
This form is required to be filed under sections 104 and 4085 of the Employee
1998
 Pumion and Welters Benefits
Retirement income Security Act of 1974 and sections 60380, 5047(e), 5067(b),

and 6058(a) of the Internal Revenue Code, referred to as the Code.
This Form is Open to

Statson Benefit Cummury Current rilers
See separate instructions.
Public Inspection.
 For the calendar plan year 1998 or fiscal plan year beginning
January 01, 1998 and ending
December, 1988
 If A(1) through A(4). B. C. and/or D. do not appty to this year's
For IRS Use Only
 return/report. leave the boxes unreaded
EP-ID
 A
This restum/report is:
(2)
the first return/report filed for the plan:
(3)
the final return/report filed for the plan: or
 (2)
an amended return/report:
(4)
a short plan year return/report (less than 12 months).
 IF ANY INFORMATION ON A PREPRINTED PAGE t IS INCORRECT, CORRECT IT. IF ANY INFORMATION IS MISSING. ADD IT. PLEASE
 USE RED INK WHEN MAKING THESE CHANGES AND INCLUDE THE PREPRINTED PAGE 1 WITH YOUR COMPLETED RETURN/REPORT.
 B
Check here If any information reported in la, 2a. 2b, or 5a changed since the test return/report for this plan
 c if your plan year changed since the last return/report, check here.
 D
If you filed for NT extension of time to file this return/repart. check here and attach a copy of the approved extension
 1a Name and address of plan sponsor (employer, it for a single-employer plan)
 (Address should include room or suite no.)

1b Employer identification number (EIN)
 47 0255149

ENRON CORP

IC Sponsor's telephone number

1400 SMITH ST

713-853-8161

HOUSTON, TX 77002-7327

1d Business code (see instructions, page 20)
 2212

te CUSIP issuer number
 293561


online 10k Wizard and looked for 11K annual reports the companies submit- ted to the U.S. Securities Exchange Commission that provide detailed fi- nancial information about employer 401(k) retirements savings plans. Not all plans are covered; only those in which the employer matches employee contributions in company stock, and grants the employees the right to buy more shares. McCartney said he found the data on 10k Wizard, a subscription service, up to date, 

McCartney obtained data about other pension plans at FreeERISA, a site that offers no-cost access to pension plan data collected by the Department of Labor's Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration under the Employee Re- tirement Income Security Act. McCartney said that the data for some companies was outdated by as much as three years. 

After looking over the documents and punching the numbers into his calcula- tor, McCartney wrote a Feb. 2 story say- ing two-thirds of the top companies had 401(k) plans in which company stock accounted for at least 40 percent of the total assets. McCartney found two com- panies based in the Twin Cities - Target and Best - with company stock con- centrations higher than Enron's. 

Comfortable with heavy-duty number 

every year submit detailed information about the plans using Form 5500, avail- able with other documents on the De- partment of Labor's Web site. In the coming months, IRE and NICAR will be selling the pension data in an easy- to-use format. 

Five years ago, News 12 Long Island reporter Mark Lagerkvist obtained the massive database (a whopping 6gb on 27 9-track tapes!) from the department via a federal Freedom of Information Act request. After carving out smaller data sets and analyzing them, Lagerkvist broadcast "Stolen Dreams," a special report on how employers plundered pension plans. 

Foreign/immigrant workers 

Soon after the Sept. 11 attacks, federal agents began sweeping the United States for suspected terror- ists, focusing on Middle Eastern men. Foreign visitors, legally in the United States with temporary work visas, were questioned. So were legal immigrants. 

So where are these workers? Data from the Immigration and Naturaliza- tion Service, part of the U.S. Justice Department, can provide some clues. The INS data, sold by the NICAR da- tabase library, specifies the sex, age, marital status, country of birth, coun- 

26


Mar Apr 2002


Uplink


try of last permanent residency, port of entry and ZIP Code of intended resi- dence for immigrants. 

With some rudimentary queries in your database manager, you'd be able to find out what national groups live in your area, and see which occupations are the most prevalent for the groups. 

Workers compensation 

State workers compensation data, used by journalists investigating bogus injury claims and injury patterns at problem work sites, can be put to other uses. 

Last year, reporters at the Washing- ton Post dug through ten years of Maryland Workers Compensation Commission data as they probed the Prince George's County Police De- partment. [For details, see "Detailing Questionable Police Shootings Re- quired Extensive Search of Docu- ments" in the March-April 2002 issue of The IRE Journal.] While examining fatal shootings by police, the report- ers mined the data for cases where police officers filed disability claims because of the stress and emotional trauma related to the shootings. One field in the database covering 700,000 unique claims sometimes contained a detailed narrative of the shootings. Af- ter identifying the cases, the report- ers obtained the original case docu- ments on file with the commission. 

Post reporters used the data again when they were looking at out-of-con- trol police dogs. This time, the report- ers queried for cases where police filed disability claims because they were bitten by department canines. 

Other journalists have put workers compensation data to use in more tra- ditional ways. In 1997, Mary Fricker and Bob Norberg, reporters at the Santa Rosa Press Democrat analyzed workers comp data and unmasked claims that fraud was behind one third of the disputed cases. 

David Herzog, formerly an investigative reporter with The Providence Journal, can be reached by e-mail at dherzog@nicar.org 

Upcoming CAR Training 

Advanced Statistics Workshop, June 9-13 - Chapel Hill, N.C CAR guru and Knight Chair in Journalism Professor Philip Meyer once again will present an advanced statistics workshop with IRE and NICAR. The workshop strengthens the skills of reporters who want to move beyond basic computer-assisted reporting and use social research methods and statistical analysis in their work, including understanding and using regressions, indexes, sampling and polling. Participants are introduced to SPSS, a statistical software package. Other instructors include Sarah Cohen of The Washington Post and IRE Executive Director Brant Houston. 

Mapping the Census Seminar, May 3-5 - Columbia, Mo. IRE and NICAR will offer this intensive hands-on training using ArcView GIS software, with a focus on mapping Census data to uncover stories. We will look at noteworthy stories that have used mapping. The sessions will include address geocoding, thematic mapping, overlaying and spatial analysis. Trainers include Andy Lehren of Dateline NBC, Jennifer LaFleur of the St. Louis Post-Dispatch and David Herzog of NICAR and the Missouri School of Journalism. Participants are encouraged to bring their own data to work on during open lab time. 

Using the Religious Census, April 10-11, 2002 - Washington, D.C. Religion Newswriters Association Workshop at National Press Club: Reporters will learn how to use data from Glenmary Research Institute's religious census, which will be released in May or early June. The Census is done every 10 years by the Institute, a religious-based research organization. The Census Bureau often refers reporters to this organization since they are barred from asking religious questions. The religious census contains information relating to the number of churches and total church membership by denomination by state and county. 

CAR Boot Camps 

March 24-29 and May 19-24 - Columbia, Mo. IRE and NICAR are offering two CAR boot camps in Missouri this spring with special tracks. The six-day boot camps each open with special sessions on campaign finance and each offer four fellowships for journalists at small- to medium-sized news organizations who are interested in improving their coverage of elections. The May boot camp also will have special sessions on using Census data. 
Aug. 4-9 - Columbia, Mo. A special track for broadcast journalists will be featured at this Boot Camp. Learn how to acquire electronic information, use spreadsheets and databases to analyze the information and to translate that information into high-impact stories. In addition, NICAR provides follow-up help when participants return to their news organizations. 

For registration and fellowship information, go to www.ire.org/training/otr.html 

Mar Apr 2002


27


Uplink


Uplink Info 

A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

Editor Brant Houston brant@ire.org 

Managing Editor Jeff Porter jeff@nicar.org 

Asst. Managing Editor David Herzog dherzog@nicar.org 

Contributing Editors Mike Sherry Amy Sherrill 

Art Director Lisa Triefenbach lisa@ire.org 

Editorial Phone 573-884-7711 

NICAR is a joint program 

of Investigative Reporters and 

Editors, Inc. and the Missouri 

NICAR services include 

School of Journalism. 

supplying journalists with 

government databases, 

training programs, tipsheets and 

data analysis. 

Director of Publications Len Bruzzese len@ire.org 

Advertising Coordinator Pia Christensen pia@ire.org 

Subscription Administrator John Green jgreen@ire.org 

Subscriptions IRE members $40, nonmembers $60 

Uplink Address: IRE-NICAR, 138 Neff Annex Missouri School of Journalism Columbia, MO 65211 

Postmaster: Please send address changes to IRE-NICAR. 

CW IO Date LIII JO diffy PII 

68 ON OW 'A!O alvd 'S'N CHO 

11999 OW
 JO unoss!

NN 831

"OUL pue
