January
February 2003
 Volume 15, Number 1

Published bimonthly by the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting
 www.nicar.org


CHARLOTTE 

Get set for 2003 CAR conference 

By Brant Houston, IRE and NICAR 

Hands-on classes extended into the evening so you don't have to miss a favorite panel. 

A special three-day track for those just starting computer- assisted reporting. 

A series of smaller workshops for those more advanced in CAR. 

These are just a few of the high- lights of IRE's upcoming Annual Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference in Charlotte, N.C., March 14-16. 

Although we had to do a quick hotel switch (now we are at the Hilton & Towers because of slowed construction of the Westin) we have just as many panels and classes planned. 

This conference marks the 10th anniversary of IRE's first CAR conference, which also was held in North Carolina. In 1993, The News & Observer in Ra- leigh hosted several hundred continued on page 17 

SPOTLIGHT: MEDICINE & HEALTH 

Databases show implant troubles By Robert Gebeloff, The (Newark, N.J.) Star-Ledger 

When The Star-Ledger first began ex- amining the world of medical implants, we soon faced a major irony: 

We were reporting on a flawed regula- tory system and, to do it, we were crunching numbers based on data coming out of this flawed system. But we found that troubled data isn't nec- essarily useless data. It just requires a little more thought. 

We already knew from documents and interviews that the Food and Drug Administration's regulation of the medical device industry was lax. The results of our analysis of FDA recall and malfunctioning device data pro- vided numbers that illustrated the scope of the problem in our project, "Foreign Objects: The Risky World of Medical Im- plants." It showed us what kinds of de- vices we needed to examine and illus- trated what kinds of problems were cropping up with these devices. 

The idea of looking into the medical device industry, and specifically im- plantable devices, came out of our Washington bureau. Reporters Robert Cohen and J. Scott Orr had covered regulatory changes at the FDA for sev- eral years and had taken note of some medical device recalls that had made national headlines. 

SPOTLIGHT: 

This issue showcases some of the best uses of CAR to report on medicine and hospitals. Journalists in New Jersey used government data and added their own to show flaws with medical implants; others in Texas used a free statistical program to rate hospital performance. See the January-February IRE Journal for more about investigating hospitals. 

Digging into health, medicine 

By Megan Christensen, IRE and NICAR 

The toll of medical errors - estimated at 44,000 to 98,000 a year - gained na- tional attention after the National Insti- tute of Medicine released "To Em is Hu- man" a few years ago. Citing death rates greater than those from highway acci- dents or breast cancer, the report chal- lenged the medical establishment to re- duce errors by 50 percent in five years. 

continued on page 16


continued on page 18


ME Database 573.884.7711 

Database Library News 

Small Business data (updated): 



The Small Business Adminis- tration won't let natural disas- ters and setbacks stand in the way of America's love affair with greasy pepperoni. More than $5.5 million has been awarded to businesses that serve cheesy slices and whole pizza pies from 1980 through September 2002. 

The SBA's Disaster Loans da- tabase can offer details about how natural and other disasters affect businesses dealing with pizza, burritos, bagels as well as products and services that aren't edible. Journalists can discover who received loans and why. 

The roughly 751,000 records include more than 9,000 recipi- ents receiving almost $1 billion in loans to help them recover from the Sept. 11, 2001, terror- ist attacks. 

As winter storms hit some parts of the country, you also can find snow removal companies to which the SBA has awarded more than $1 million combined through general 7(a) business loans. Since the SBA began in 1953, it has offered loans through the 7(a) program to help small businesses in the United States. 

Within the SBA 7(a) database of small business loans are nearly 830,000 records of com- panies that have received the guaranteed loans since 1953. Journalists can use this data to determine which lenders give small businesses the most 

NICAR UPDATE 

continued on page 4 

Open Source: Free, but worth the cost? 

By David Herzog, NICAR and Missouri School of Journalism 

With newsrooms strapped with tight budgets, free open-source software sounds like a great deal for journalists. But is it? 

With this issue, Uplink starts exploring that question with a series of road tests designed to see whether these open- source packages meet the demanding needs of computer-assisted reporting. 

In recent months, the open-source movement has garnered heightened interest with the release of OpenOffice - targeted at users looking for an al- ternative to Microsoft Office. Also, Lo- tus Development Corp. founder Mitch Kapor gave the movement a boost when he announced his nonprofit foun- dation would develop an open-source personal information manager. 

Under open-source rules, users may download and use the software at no cost. Programmers are encouraged to view and modify the software source code. Proponents say that quickens 

the pace of software development and, in the end, results in better programs. 

Already there are scores of open source programs for all kinds of applications. Looking for a geographic information sys- tem (GIS)? There's GRASS. Need a structured query language-based data- base manager? You can use MySQL or PostgreSQL How about something as simple as a Web browser? You can down- load Mozilla, based on the Netscape Communicator code released in 1998. 

With all the choices available, it's tough to know which programs are robust and which are still buggy. We'll give you answers. 

Aron Pilhofer of the Center for Public In- tegrity, and former director of IRE's Cam- paign Finance Information Center, has volunteered to write our open-source feature and kicks off our coverage with a review of OpenOffice on page 14. 

Contact David Herzog by e-mail at dherzog@nicar.org. 

Hands-on CAR training upcoming 

IRE and NICAR has numerous training opportunities in the com- ing months for journalists who want to learn computer-assisted reporting. For a complete list of training events visit www.ire.org/ training/otr.html. 

Here are some of the highlights: 

There are three CAR Boot Camps in Columbia, Mo., in the coming months for journalists who want hands-on training in how to use spreadsheets and database manag- ers to analyze data for high-impact 

stories. The sessions are March 23-28, May 18-23 and Aug. 3-8. 

The IRE Annual Conference, June 5-8 in Washington, D.C., will fea- ture demonstrations of CAR tech- niques and hands-on classes. Members of the NICAR staff will be there to help you develop your stories and answer questions about computer-assisted report- ing. Journalists can count on stel- lar panels and special presenta- tions about national security, pub- lic safety, courts, the military, busi- ness, education and more. 

2


January February 2003


Uplink


RELIGION 

Counting the faithful with church roll data 

By Ron Nixon, IRE and NICAR 

How many Baptists live in your com- munity? What about Catholics or Lutherans? How many Jews or Mus- lims are there? 

From 1850 to 1936, you could find an- swers to questions like these in U.S. Census results. But the U.S. govern- ment dropped a question about reli- gious affiliation in 1946, partly because the Christian Science Church had con- cerns about invasions of privacy. 

That left little demographic information about religious organizations. When the Census Bureau tried to revive the question for the 1960 Census, opposi- tion from religious groups caused the agency to scuttle the plan. 

Fortunately, journalists can find answers by analyzing the Churches And Church Membership In The United States sur- vey conducted every 10 years by a group of religious organizations, 

Led by the Association of Statisticians of American Religious Bodies, the group started to conduct its own cen- sus of religious group membership in the early 1950s. The survey provides the best available information on the membership of religious bodies in the United States. 

More than three dozen news organi- zations recently used the 2000 data to examine religious beliefs and atten- dance in their communities. 

Tracking membership 

The Palm Beach Post examined church membership in South Florida and found that Palm Beach County was the sec- ond-most religious county in the state, based on the percentage of people who claim some type of religious affiliation. The paper included color maps and graphics to enhance its stories. 

The Charleston Daily Mail did a story showing West Virginia ranked second among the states in the number of con- gregations per capita. 

In contrast, The (Tacoma, Wash.) News Tribune found that Washington ranks next to last among the 50 states in church attendance and member- ship, dropping from 47th in 1990. One-third of Washington residents attend or belong to a church, syna- gogue or mosque, compared with one-half nationally. The Oregonian of Portland, Ore., found similar results in its review of the religious census. 

The Herald News of West Paterson, N.J., used the data to look at religious groups that claimed the survey under- estimated their membership. Mike Corn of The Hays (Kan.) Daily News found that several of the reported fig- ures in the survey conflicted with num- bers provided by local religious groups. For example, the census showed that church membership for several congre- gations in one county had declined. Corn traced the decline not to mem- bership losses, but to counting prob- lems in the study. The churches had been included in the population counts of another county. 

Limits in data 

The current census is a survey of about 150 religious organizations. The study is the only census to pro- vide a county-by-county breakdown of religious participation. The study provides the total population for a continued on page 4 

Other sources of religion data 

While the Churches And Church Membership In The United States survey is considered the best col- lection of religious data available, it is by no means the only one. There are dozens of places to find data about religion, including the ones listed here: 

www.thearda.com Located at Penn State University, the Ameri- can Religion Data Archive holds dozens of datasets related to reli- gions, some down to the local level. 

www.adherents.com This is a col- lection of more than 41,000 adher- ent statistics and religious geogra- phy citations. Journalists can find ad- herent numbers by group and place. 

http://hirr.hartsem.edu/sociology/ sociology_research_datasets.html The Hartford Institute for Religion Research at Hartford Seminary in Connecticut specializes in studying religion in public life and includes 

several datasets on its Web site. 

www.gallup.com Opinion research firm The Gallup Organization has several polls with religion-based information. 

www.nazareneresearch.org Church of the Nazarene Research Office. Good site with religion data plus interactive maps that can be queried on the Web site. 

For general reporting on religion, see these sites: 

www.religionwriters.com The Re- ligion Newswriters Association is a nonprofit membership association founded in 1949 to advance the professional standards of religion reporting in the secular press and create a support network for reli- gion reporters. 

Journalist's Online links for Religion www.toad.net/~andrews/jrelol.html 

January February 2003


3


Database Library News continued from page 2 



money, as well as which busi- nesses are receiving that money. 

Another database from the SBA contains a list of companies qualifying for the 8(a) minority and other disadvantaged busi- ness programs. NICAR has of- fered this data in the past, but this latest update contains many new fields. Journalists can discover how many women, veterans, blacks, American Indians, Native Americans, Puerto Ricans, His- panics and other minorities are active in the program. 

Immigration data (updated): 

NICAR just updated its data- base of immigrants admitted to the U.S. as permanent legal residents. The data, maintained by the Immigration and Natural- ization Service, contains char- acteristics of the aliens who were granted legal permanent residence in the U.S. during fis- cal years 2000 and 1999. 

In fiscal 1999, some 647,000 aliens were granted permanent residence. In fiscal year 2000, there were nearly 850,000. The database includes each immigrant's country of birth and country of last permanent resi- dence, as well as the intended metropolitan area and state of residence. Journalists can track which countries most immi- grants come from and which occupations are listed most. 

Counting continued from page 3 

To order or find out more about these databases, visit www.ire.org/datalibrary or call 573-884-7711. 

county, number of religious bodies and number of members and adherents. 

The study is limited in many ways be- cause the numbers are reported by the religious organizations and not all groups participate in the study. For ex- ample, in the 2000 census, 14 religious groups declined to participate, includ- ing some predominantly black congre- gations. Several groups participated for the first time, making comparisons be- tween census years difficult. 

Also, many Muslim groups have taken issue with the religious study, saying that it underestimates the total num- ber of their members. An additional problem with the data is the way membership is defined by the reli- gious groups that report. While many include only those who attend ser- vices on a regular basis, other groups include anyone with an affiliation to the religious body, including children. 

To standardize the data, the ASARB uses adherents rather than members to examine growth of religious organi- zations. Adherents are adult members and their children. Membership totals include only those who are full regular members of a religious group. 

Another problem with the data is that in a few counties, the number of ad- herents actually exceeds the total population. The ASARD says this could be because many people live in one county, but attend church in another. 

Despite these limits, the data is the best available information for journalists re- porting on religious group numbers. 

The data can be obtained from the Glenmary Research Institute in Nash- ville, Tenn. The data comes on a single CD in Microsoft Access and costs $100. Older datasets can be obtained from the American Religion Data Archive at Penn State University at www.thearda.com. 

Contact Ron Nixon by e-mail at ron@ire.org. 

Better Watchdog Workshops 

Investigative Reporting on the Beat 

Investigative Reporters and Editors Inc. and the Society of Professional Journalists, with funding from the Sigma Delta Chi Foundation, have joined forces to offer a series of workshops focused on doing investigative reporting while covering a beat. 

The workshops, specifically for journalists at small- to medium-sized news organizations and those in bureaus of larger organizations, will emphasize the use of freedom-of- information laws and address juggling a beat while producing investigative and enterprise pieces. 

"You'll learn enough in the first 15 minutes to keep you busy for a month." Kevin McGrath, The Wichita Eagle 

Workshops are scheduled for: Feb. 22 - Tempe, Ariz. April 5 - Atlanta, Ga. March 8 - Storrs, Conn. April 12 - Spokane, Wash. March 22 - St. Petersburg, Fla. April 12 - Long Island, N.Y. March 28 - Minneapolis, Minn. Oct. 4 - Eugene, Ore. March 29 - Columbia, Mo. Oct. 25 - State College, Pa. April 5 - Cleveland, Ohio 



For more information, visit www.ire.org/training/betterwatchdog. 

To request a workshop for your area, contact Executive Director Brant Houston at watchdog@ire.org. 

4


January
February 2003


Uplink 

BROADCAST CAR 

TV pioneer Cox rolls with changes 

By Jaimi Dowdell, IRE and NICAR 

One of the first times former WCCO- Minneapolis reporter Alan Cox at- tempted computer-assisted reporting, he used a spare computer loaded with Lotus 1-2-3 for DOS from the TV station's accounting department. 

That was in 1990, even before he was officially the station's CAR specialist. Cox's experience of endless keypunch- ing was one of the first in a long line of projects that created respect for the reporter's work and helped change the way broadcasters use CAR. 

After a 25-year career in television, Cox left WCCO at the end of June. Since then he has been freelancing out of his home in Minnesota and has done some work for the Star-Tribune and KMSP-Minneapolis. 

"He showed a whole crop of TV report- ers that the same computer-assisted reporting skills that print journalists were regularly using to break big sto- ries could also be applied to TV news," said Mike Wendland, technology col- umnist at the Detroit Free Press. 

Brant Houston, executive director of IRE and NICAR, said "Alan has been a true pioneer in computer-assisted re- porting in broadcast." 

"He not only has led the way with sto- ries, but also helped organize and teach our boot camps focused on the particular skills needed by broadcast journalists." 

Storytelling with CAR 

After several years working as a gen- eral assignment reporter and then business reporter at WCCO, Cox re- ceived an opportunity to learn and use CAR when news director John Lansing approached Cox with a pro- posal in 1993. Lansing told Cox that 

he was thinking of creating a com- puter-assisted reporting position and wanted him to do the job. 

"Alan and I had the discussion, and he made the point that if we do it, we need the proper training and we need to do it well," said Lansing, now se- nior vice president of Scripps Howard Broadcasting. 

He crunched data and assisted with investigative projects and the day-to-day reporting in the newsroom. 

Cox was pulled off the regular sched- ule so he could learn how the tools of his new trade full time. Although he had little previous computer experience and did not even own a computer, he was eager to learn. 

"My wife remembers that basically for the first year and a half, I stopped read- ing for recreation and just read com- puter manuals," Cox said. "I remem- ber one day, all I accomplished was to learn to change the colors in Windows." 

Once Cox put his skills to work, the station created a set for him called "Computer Center 4". From there, he crunched data and assisted with inves- tigative projects and the day-to-day reporting in the newsroom. 

Freelancer Julie Kramer was senior producer for investigations at WCCO 

and worked with Cox on many stories. "A lot of people claim to do computer- assisted reporting, but Alan was what I call an alpha-geek," Kramer said. "He knew his stuff, but he wasn't just all computer; as a journalist he under- stood the importance of storytelling." 

The stories Cox developed with Kramer and the WCCO investigative team were some of his favorites while at the station. Together, they tracked voter fraud in Minnesota by matching a database of criminal history records with a list of registered voters. After this story, Cox said Kramer had the idea to use the same felons data and cross it with a database of hunting licenses. 

"We found more than 500 people who weren't supposed to have a gun that were licensed to use guns," Cox said. 

Freelance route 

Cox also contributed behind the scenes. After attending a NICAR ad- vanced Boot Camp in 1998, he set up an intranet so WCCO journalists could access information in driver registra- tion, voter and criminal record data- bases for their daily reporting. 



"It helped us find people that didn't want to be found," Kramer said. "It cut the paper trail time down immensely and a lot of reporters who couldn't do it on their own were able to do it quickly." 

When Cox's contract came up for re- newal last summer, he decided it was time to try something new. While he said he's not sure what that will end up being, he remains very interested in CAR and putting in the time to do it well. Those who worked with him at WCCO recognize his contributions to the station's success as well as broadcast reporting. 

"If you want to have a serious investi- gative unit at a TV station you need a computer-assisted reporting element and we had that in Alan Cox," Kramer said. "We were able to do a lot of sto- ries that we couldn't otherwise." 

Contact Jaimi Dowdell by e-mail at jaimi@nicar.org. 

January February 2003


5


CAMPAIGN FINANCE Judges database helps uncover political games By Michael Beebe and Robert J. McCarthy, The Buffalo (N.Y.) News 

When a respected town justice in the Buffalo, N.Y., suburb of Amherst de- cided to run for state Supreme Court, New York's highest trial bench, he rented some billboards to announce his entry into the race. 

In no time at all, he was called on the carpet by the Democratic party chief in Buffalo's Erie County, G. Steven Pigeon. 

"Listen you SOB," Pigeon told the judge. "Don't you ever involve the general public in this process. It's my call. Nobody else's." 

And when a veteran Supreme Court justice offered to mediate a dispute involving Pigeon at a judicial nomi- nating convention, Pigeon told him, in the presence of witnesses includ- ing Buffalo's mayor, "Sit down and shut up you 21 

Both judges went on the record to re- count these incidents, a rarity, as any- one who has covered courts knows. Judges, at least in New York state, don't say much outside the courtroom. 

But we were able to convince these judges and others to go public in The Buffalo News last summer because of the spadework we did in discovering how political party bosses had taken over the system used to nominate judges. 

A database we compiled of every state Supreme Court candidacy since 1999, and every local race since 1994, allowed us to go to these can- didates and ask some tough ques- tions. Among them: 

Why did those running for judge here, even those endorsed by both major political parties, raise thousands of dollars and contribute to dozens of political campaigns when state judicial 

canons forbid them from doing so? 

Why was it that judicial candidates here - and nowhere else in the state were each charged $7,500 for judi- cial nominating conventions, when the actual costs were a couple hundred dollars to rent a hall and put out some coffee and doughnuts for delegates? 
Why were sitting judges putting the arm on local lawyers for campaign contributions when these lawyers could end up appearing before the very same judges? 

The three-day report helped bring down the Democratic party chairman, sparking a change in how local judges are nominated and a pledge from party leaders to stop forcing judicial candi- dates to raise funds for others. 

Before it became a series, though, it had been one of those things that gnaws at a beat reporter, having to get a story in the paper but knowing there's a far better tale to tell if only there were time to really pull it together. 

Contributions database 

Robert J. McCarthy, the political re- porter at The News, kept running across the same thing each election cycle. Why were candidates for seats on New York's Supreme Court - even those guaranteed election because they were endorsed by Democrat and Republican party leaders - still raising and spending thousands of dollars? 

He wrote different versions of the story several times, but they always seemed to be buried among other election pieces, lost in the crush of more im- portant election stories. 

McCarthy tried several times to set aside the time to dig into this, but the 

pressure of beat stories kept him from getting to it. He held onto a growing pile of campaign financial reports-the beginning of what came to be a valu- able database. 

Finally last year, Stan Evans, an as- sistant managing editor at The News, allowed McCarthy to carve out some time from his beat and teamed him with projects reporter Michael Beebe to work on the judges story. 

The reporters hooked up with Andrew Bailey, a researcher in The News' library and our newspaper's database and spreadsheet expert, and got to work. 

The first thing we did was download all campaign finance data for every state Supreme Court race in New York from 1999 to 2002 from the state Board of Elections. The board only started computerizing these records in 1999. So for local judges we used McCarthy's paper records going back to 1994. File clerks typed in the data. 

We then created a database of judi- cial campaign finance reports, with every contribution and expense listed for anyone who ran for state Supreme Court Although the series would fo- cus on candidates in the western part of New York state, known as the eighth judicial district, we wanted to know how judge candidates here ranked with their counterparts. 

We also downloaded the attorney di- rectory from the New York Unified Court System Web site. We merged this with the contributions from our database and got a list of all lawyers who contributed to those running for judge. And because judicial districts don't conform to other, more recognizable jurisdictions, we used ArcView, a GIS program that allowed us more flexibil- ity for graphics when the series ran. 

Interviewing data 

Bailey set up everything in a user- friendly format that allowed us to run any number of queries on anything that struck our fancy. After awhile, we got comfortable enough so it was like in- 

6


January
February 2003


Uplink 

terviewing someone. In this case, we asked the questions of the data. 

We found, as we suspected, that only political parties in Erie County charged a $7,500 fee for a judicial nominating convention, and that the Republicans had abandoned it in recent years. 

We found that we had the most expen- sive state Supreme Court races in New York. We found a judge without an opponent who still managed to spend $75,000 and hire the party chairman's roommate as a campaign director. 

And we found that party chairmen got around the ban on judicial candidates donating to other campaigns through a loophole, one big enough to fit a buf- fet table through. The exemption al- lowed candidates to buy tickets to po- litical dinners, some of them costing $5,000 each. So while the party chair- man kept these candidates waiting months and months for endorsements, these potential judges kept getting billed for more and more tickets. 

Armed with this data, we were able to interview with considerable authority and confidence the judges and judi- cial candidates. Once judges and can- didates knew what we had and what we intended to say, the judicial veil of secrecy was dropped. It turned out they didn't like the system either, that it was demeaning and that judges were be- ing nominated more for who they knew and how much they could raise, rather than what their qualifications were. 

Contact Michael Beebe by e-mail at mbeebe@buffnews.com. 

After the series ran, Pigeon, who had faced opposition before, withdrew from the race when it became clear he didn't have the votes to stay as party chair- man. The new party chairman pledged there would be no more $7,500 judi- cial nominating fees, and one promi- nent Democrat ran for judge on a pledge he would accept no more than $100 from any lawyer. 

IRE ANNUAL CONFERENCE


WASHINGTON, D.C. June 5-8 

Don't miss out! 

The best in the business will gather for dozens of panels, workshops and special presentations on public safety, national security, courts, the military, business, education, local government and many more. 

PLUS! Hands-on computer classes, exhibitors and job recruiters. 

CAR HELP 

Demonstrations of computer-assisted reporting tools and techniques, plus useful Internet sites. NICAR staff on hand to help you with your stories. 

Contact Robert J. McCarthy by e-mail at rmccarthy@buffnews.com. 

Conference locations: JW Marriott Hotel 1331 Pennsylvania Ave. Medill School of Journalism 1325 G St. NW, Suite 730 National Press Club 13th Floor, 529 14th Street NW 

For registration and more information, visit www.ire.org/training/dc03/ 

January February 2003


7


www.ire.org 

SPOTLIGHT: MEDICINE & HEALTH 

Free stats programs compare hospitals 

By Andrea Adams, Missouri School of Journalism 

Analyzing millions of hospital dis- charge records might seem daunting, but customized statistical programs created for the federal government can churn through huge datasets in just a couple of hours - and help uncover interesting patterns in patient care. 

cial report focused on specific medi- cal topics, such as cardiac proce- dures and care for the elderly. The Star-Telegram posted the results of its analysis on the Web so readers could compare hospitals based on specific procedures or diseases. 

SAS
HO
 Edit View Tools Bun Solutions Window Help

Contents at Weib'

Datal
Rokadi

FRITE SAS OUTPUT DATA 3ET TO CONRA-DELILITED TEXT FILE
 FOR EXPORT IVTO SPREADSHEETS
 *

Rpiq08
Rpiq09

VICACRO TEXT

NIF
STEXIF3
1
THEN
*DO:

Rpiq10
Rpiq11
DATA
NULL

SET OUTP3 COUTH ILP3.

in
FILE IOTEXTP3 LRECL=2000;

IF N -1 THEN PUT "Hosp Id
","
"tge"
"Sex"
"Payer"
"Face

Apig12
Apiq13
*TPI001®
"TPI002"
MIPIQUSM
"TPI004"

"TFICOS"
*TPICOS"
*TPT007"
"TPICOS"
 "TPI009"
"TPIQ10"
"TPIQ11"
"TPIQ12"
 TPI013
*TPIO14"
"TPI015"
"TPIQ15"

Apiq14
Rpiq15
"TPI017"
"TPI018"
"TPI019"
"TP1020"

"TPIC21"
"TPIQ22"
"TPIC23"
"TPI024"
 "TPIQ25"
"TPIO30"
"TPIOSIN
 "PPIC08"

Rpiq16
Rpiq17
"FPIC09"
"TPI010"
"PPIQ11"
"PPI012"

"PPIQ13"
"PPI014"
"PPI015"
"PPI016"
 "PP1017"
"PPI018"
"PPI019"
"PPICZ0"
 "PPIO21"
"PPIO22"
"PPI023"
"PPIQ24"

Apiq18
Pipig19
"PPICES"
*PPIQ90*
"PPIQUI"

"ORIQUE"

"OPIQIO"
"OPIOLS
"GPICIZ

PIQ13"
"OPI014"
"OPIQ15"
MORSOLE

Rpig20
Rpiq21
"OPI017"
"OPIQIE"
"OPEQ19"
"OPI020"

Results
of Exploxer
Dulput United
Log-United


The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, work- ing with an outside researcher, used one of the programs to help analyze 5 million patient discharge records from the Texas Health Care Informa- tion Council for "Vital Signs," a July 2002 special report about hospital quality in Tarrant and Dallas counties. 

The newspaper found discrepancies in death rates for a variety of dis- eases and in the performance of Caesarian sections. Also, the analy- sis showed that hospitals using new procedures and medicines were the most effective in helping patients. Many of the dozen stories in the spe- 

First evaluation 

The Texas Health Care Information Council was created in 1995 to pub- lish report cards about hospitals' per- formance rates for particular medical services. Nothing had ever been pub- lished by the agency. As a result, the Star-Telegram decided to conduct its own analysis to show readers how North Texas hospitals compared. 

Obtaining the data was easy but costly. The newspaper paid $8,000 for two years of data, which was provided on a CD-ROM for each quarter. Jeff Claassen, the newspaper's com- puter-assisted reporting specialist, 

had decided to examine information from 1999 and 2000, the only two full years of data, to decrease the chance that a hospital's ranking might be dis- torted by an abnormally bad year. 

The Star-Telegram decided to use the same computer program the that the Texas Health Care Information Coun- cil used to analyze the patient medi- cal procedure data: In-Patient Qual- ity Indicators. 

In-Patient Quality Indicators was cre- ated at Stanford University for the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, part of the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. The program comes in two formats: SAS program files and SPSS syntax files. The agency provides the files and documentation for free download on its Web site (www.ahcpr.gov) but us- ers need to have a SAS or SPSS li- cense to run the programs. 

Rather than obtain a license, the news- paper hired Wayne Lehman, a research scientist at Texas Christian University, to conduct the analysis using SAS. 

The program works by assigning codes to each patient discharge record based on that patient's type and severity of illness. It then com- pares the patients undergoing a sur- gery or treatment to a national sample of patients undergoing the same, and adjusts the hospital's mor- tality rate using the difference be- tween the two. The risk-adjusted rates take into account how old or sick the patients are to make hospital comparisons fairer. The program also calculates the number of times a cer- tain procedure was performed and the rate at which a hospital performed a certain procedure. 

Before analyzing the SAS program re- sults, which were compiled in an ASCII text file, Claassen verified the numbers. He made sure the calcula- tions were done using the entire dataset and checked them against other sources. He focused his analy- sis on death rates for 10 medical pro- 

8


January
February 2003


Uplink 

cedures, primarily those involving heart problems and birth. Following advice from a researcher at the agency, Claassen included only those hospitals that performed the procedure at least 60 times during the two years to re- duce the risk of unreliable statistics. 

Claassen used FoxPro and Microsoft SQL Server to run queries, ranking the hospitals that performed best and worst at each procedure and compar- ing local hospitals to others in Texas. Charts of these results were compiled in Excel for medical reporter Charlotte Huff, business reporter Trebor Banstetter and Claassen to use. The three reporters called area hospitals with the best and worst rates to find out what kinds of factors can contrib- ute to high or low mortality rates. 

Claassen recommends using pro- grams like the In-Patient Quality In- dicators because it provides the first widely recognized risk-adjustment methodology, decreasing the chances that a news organization's 

X inspit SPSS Syntax ditor
 File
Edit
View
Statistics
Graphs
Utilities
Run
Window
Help

define iqsps1 0.

Title: IQSPS1.SPS (Program 1)
 Purpose: Assign flags to inpatient records for AHRQ
 inpatient quality indicators
 Version: 2:1, October 2002
 Note: In order to run this program, the following parameters
 must be set to reflect your data and your computer:
 Itempdir= should specify an existing directory where
 temporary SPSS data can be stored. Data
 within this directory can be safely deleted
 once the program completes.
 Ipermdir= should specify an existing directory where
 permanent SPSS data should be stored.
 Itextdir= should specify an existing directory where all
 supplied .txt files are stored.
 lindata = should specify the name of the input SPSS data
 containing hospital discharges for this program
 to process. This dataset should be stored within
 the directory specified above by Ipermdir.
 loutdata= name of dataset this program will output. It will
 be output to the directory specified above by
 Ipermdir.

SPSS Processor is ready
(L1 11)


analysis would be criticized. Claassen said journalists who would like to do a story like this elsewhere should keep in mind that many hospitals are non- profit organizations and therefore not 

subject to open-records laws. To get around this limitation, he suggests reading medical journals so you can ask better questions of hospitals with high or low mortality rates. 

Heart bypass mortality 

Medical research suggests that hospitals with lower mortality rates are more likely to do a procedure well. For more information, click here. 



Risk
Hospital (click for more)	City	Deaths	Patients	adjusted
rate
Medical Center of Arlington	Arlington	7.	202	2,08%
North Hills Hospital	Richland Hills	4	109	2.13%
Doctors Hospital	Dallas	3	260	2.72%
The Medical Center of Mesquite	Mesquite	4	239	3.16%	Telegram
Baylor University Medical Center	Dallas	67	1,943	3.34%
Baylor Medical Center at Irving	Irving	26	427	3.84%
Harris Methodist H.E.B.	Bedford	11	251	3.85%
Medical City Dallas Hospital	Dallas	36	928	4.08%
St. Paul University Hospital	Dallas	11	284	4.17%
Methodist Medical Center	Dallas	9	297	4.31%
Plaza Medical Center of Fort
Fort Worth
Worth
23	797	4.37%
Presbyterian Hospital of Dallas	Dallas	40	888	4.48%
Baylor Medical Center at Garland	Garland	14	370	4,55%
Arlington Memorial Hospital	Arlington	16	466	4,86%
Zale Lipshy University Hospital	Dallas	9	244	4,94%
Harris Methodist Fort Worth	Fort Worth	31	730	5.03%
RHD Memorial Medical Center	Dallas	6	118	5.75%
Baylor All Saints Medical Center at
Fort Worth
Fort Worth	32	646	6.51%
Osteopathic Medical Center of
Fort Worth
Texas
12	178	6.62%



Mortality rates are calculated for all patients except those transferred to other acute-care hospitals. 

REQUIRED READING For Your Newsroom 

Numbers In The Newsroom Using Math and Statistics in News, by Sarah Cohen 

Pulitzer Prize- winning journalist Sarah Cohen guides reporters through fractions, rates, percents and per capitas. Making inflation adjustments. Understanding averages. Doing the budget story. Questioning surveys and polls. 

NUMBERS
 NEWSROOM


ORDER TODAY! Call 573-882-3364 with your VISA or MasterCard -OR- Visit our Web site at www.ire.org/store for online ordering or order form downloads IRE MEMBERS: $15 each NONMEMBERS: $25 each 

January
February 2003


9


IRE Unbities 573.884.7711 

PUBLIC HEALTH Eatery data shows poor food handling By Fred Vallance-Jones, The Hamilton (Ontario) Spectator 

The cook in the small family restau- rant wanted to make sure the eggs weren't greasy. 

So before the heaping plate of break- fast went to the customer, she used a reusable cloth lying on the counter to dab the eggs. She then put the grease- laden rag down, ready for the next meal. It would be used for six hours before being washed. 

Such was the scene witnessed by a public health inspector in Hamilton, Ontario, an industrial city with nearly half a million residents, about an hour's drive southwest of Toronto. 

The inspector wrote about the incident in his notes, one of more than 2,000 pages of inspection reports released to The Hamilton Spectator as part of our investigation into restaurant safety. 

The resulting five-part series, called "Reservations," revealed shocking food-handling practices in the back kitchens of well-known eateries. 

But the series was more than just a recitation of horror stories about mouse infestations, rotting food and cooks who never washed their hands. Using computer-assisted reporting, it also re- vealed that the city health department was frequently failing to do the inspec- tions required to protect the public, and even when serious problems were found, little or nothing was being done. 

Senior managers at the newspaper had wanted to do a story on restau- rant safety for some time. There would be high reader interest, and similar CAR reports by other newspapers had led to reforms in several North Ameri- can cities, including Toronto. 

The responsibility eventually fell to me 

because of my special interests in CAR and public documents research. Little did 1 know that getting out of the start- ing gate was going to take the better part of a year. 

Obstruction 101 

My goal was to obtain a copy of the city's database of food premise inspec- tions so I could see which establishments had the worst records and whether the city was doing the minimum inspec- tions required to protect the public. 

But the municipal health bureaucrats were in no hurry to hand over a disk. 

Ontario has an open-records law that specifically applies to municipalities. Under it, the city was supposed to make a decision on my request within 30 days of my filing it in March 2000. In reality, it took five months and a meeting with the city clerk before | fi- nally got my first response. 

The answer was no. I could not have the database. But if I was willing to hand over a check for more than 1,000 Canadian dollars (about $630 U.S.), they'd be happy to make paper printouts. 

The health bureaucrats said they couldn't provide an electronic copy. 

The provincial health ministry had de- signed the database system and pro- vided it to municipalities to make it easier for them to report inspection data to the ministry. In addition to be- ing able to spit out what the province needed, the system allowed for some standard printed reports, including a list of inspections for any one premise. The city's staff had no idea how to make a copy of the underlying data they had themselves entered. 

When questioned they did provide a 

key piece of information, however. The application was written in Microsoft FoxPro. 

As I had used FoxPro extensively in the past, I now knew it should be straightforward to write a query to pro- duce the data I wanted. I called the ministry people who had designed the application, and after some initial re- luctance, they agreed to write the query and provide it to the city to run. 

By November 2000 I finally had a disk in hand, the cost about $30. 

Table troubles 

Once my disk arrived, I was not sur- prised to find the data was dirty. 

There were two tables. One contained information about establishments, each identified with a unique ID. It linked to detailed inspection informa- tion stored in the second table. 

In the establishment table, a handful of the ID numbers were duplicated, with more than one establishment having the same number. Usually it happened because a premise had changed hands (and names) and someone had neglected to create a new ID. In two instances the mistake was inexpli- cable. I chose to eliminate those two premises from any further analysis. 

The inspection table was twice as dirty. Some inspection entries were dupli- cated, and a later review of paper records revealed that a small number of inspections were not entered at all. 

I had to design queries to eliminate the duplicates, which could be identified from one of the fields. As for the miss- ing inspections, they seemed few in number and health bureaucrats main- tained the data was at least 98 percent complete. The deficiencies were later revealed to readers. 

To decide which paper files I wanted to see, I used a field that recorded the num- ber of critical violations found on an in- spection visit. A critical violation is a mis- take in food preparation or handling that 

10


January
February 2003


Uplink 

has the potential to cause food poison- ing, such as storing foods at tempera- tures where bacteria thrive and grow. 

I compiled a list of premises that either had large total numbers of critical vio- lations or a large number of failing in- spections. I then submitted an informal request for the detailed paper files. 

Without the data, we could never have zeroed in so well on premises that had consistently had problems. 

Dirty dining 

I received the paper records in early 2001. From there, the project sat on the backburner until May, when City Editor Jim Poling assigned me to work on it full time. 

By that point, I had received an up- dated run of the inspection data from the city. Using Microsoft Access, I que- ried the database extensively and de- termined how many times each premise had been inspected, as well as how many inspections the depart- ment was doing. 

Using Excel, I calculated how long passed between individual inspections of each establishment. All of this re- vealed that the city was falling far short of the inspection schedule required by provincial law. In some cases, years passed between visits, a fact that I confirmed with the owners of the es- tablishments themselves. 

There was still a key piece missing. 

Roger Gillespie, the night managing editor at The Spectator, observed: It was important that the reader under- stand the potential consequences of a system that failed. That meant docu- menting cases of food poisoning. 

I filed a new freedom of information request to another branch of the pub- lic health department, asking for records detailing outbreaks from the previous year and a half. 

While [ waited for those documents, I interviewed restaurant owners, food 

safety experts, the inspectors and top health bureaucrats. By early Septem- ber I had received records document- ing several dozen outbreaks or sus- pected outbreaks of food poisoning and was tracking down one of the vic- tims, who had suffered the humiliation of seeing the guests at her wedding meal fall ill. 

When "Reservations" launched on Nov. 24, 2001, we led with the wedding story and documented the failure of the city to live up to its obligations to protect the public. 

On Monday (The Spectator, like many Canadian papers, does not publish on Sunday), we wrote about the restau- rants with the worst inspection records. Three more days of stories followed, including a look at systems used by other cities to disclose the results of inspections to the public. We also ran sidebars giving necessary background on food safety issues and posted sum- mary information derived from the city database on our Web site. 

The response from the public and poli- ticians was overwhelming in the true sense of that overused word. 

My voicemail was overloaded, letters and e-mails poured in and our Web site was swamped as outraged readers found out for the first time about filthy conditions in restaurant kitchens and the city's failure to make them clean up. 

By the second day of our series, the politicians were already promising a cleanup. By the time the last of the sto- ries ran, councillors had voted to hire additional inspectors and to develop an action plan to fix the problems identi- fied by the newspaper. 

In the meantime, shortly after our se- ries ran, the owner of that family res- taurant ordered his staff to stop using the "egg cloths." He still insisted the cloths posed no risk to the public, but his din- ers apparently thought otherwise. 

Contact Fred Vallance-Jones by e-mail at fvjones@hamiltonspectator.com 

Annual Computer-Assisted Reporting Conference 

MARCH 14-16, 2003 

Charlotte


NORTH CAROLINA 

Panels that touch on every beat: 

Census, crime, education, local and state government, freedom of information and transportation 

Hands-on computer classes: Spreadsheets, database managers, mapping, statistical software and more 

For hotel reservations call: 800-445-8667 and ask for the Investigative Reporters and Editors room block before Feb. 14 

NEW LOCATION Hilton Charlotte & Towers 222 East Third St. Charlotte N.C. 28202 

Sponsors: The Charlotte Observer NBC News 

REGISTER ONLINE AT www.ire.org/charlotte or call 573-882-2042 

January
February 2003


11


www.nicar.org 

Tech tip Using SAS code in other programs 

By Jeff Porter, IRE and NICAR 

SAS out of your budget? Think again. You can use some SAS files with the more widely used programs such as Excel, Access or FoxPro to ease your work considerably. 

SAS programs abound in state and federal agencies, and are often downloadable from the Web. They're valuable even for non-SAS users. 

Using language in SAS programs - ending with the sas suffix and eas- ily read with Notepad or any text editor - you can create lookup tables or UPDATE queries in Access or REPLACE commands in FoxPro. 

The IRE and NICAR Database Li- brary recently did some analysis for a project on the causes of death for the Columbia Missourian newspaper using a mortality file containing data of every death in Missouri during a 10-year period. A SAS program pro- vided by health department authori- ties in Kansas helped us write a FoxPro program to categorize causes of death. 

The official codes of causes of death, called the International Classification of Diseases, have changed over time. So the data has a different set of codes for deaths 1999 and after, and those before then. Those clas- sification codes are extremely de- tailed. For example, there are sev- eral codes that represent a death caused by a faulty heart valve. De- pending on what you need to know, that might be helpful. For the pur- poses of the Missourian project, though, we needed fewer, broader categories. For example, we wanted a "heart disease" category that would cover those heart valves and several 

File Edit View Insert Format Tools Data Window Help
 G
was
&
to
for
10
?
Courier New
10
B
U
 B2
=IF(MID(A2,7,1)=) "replace all aggcod with "&TRIM(C2)&" for between(allcod,"&
 A
B
is
 1 ALLCOD
AGGCOD
 2 2001" "2003"
replace all aggcod with "1005" for between (allood, "2001", "2003"
1005*
 3
 4


other causes. And we preferred to have causes of death reported in plain English. 

Fortunately, Kansas has a SAS pro- gram to do that. 

Here's a snippet: proc format library = death print; VALUE $TIR31GP 20044,M20051V1001 /* TUBERCU- LOSIS 



2009'='1002'	/*
SEPTICEMIA */
2010/='1003	/*
SYPHILIS *
2015'=*1004	/* AIDS/
HIV */
'2001'-'2003,'2006'
'2008','2011'-'2014
2016'.2017'='1005" /* OTHER
INFECTIONS-PARASITES
20181-02040'='1006	**CANCER	*/
'2043' -''1007	1
DIABETES */
2048'='1008'	/*
ALZHEIMERS DISEASE *	/
2049 '2059'='1009 /* HEART
DISEASE */



2060'="1010" /* HYPERTENSION '2061' -''1011' 1* STROKE* 2062'='1012 1* ATHEROSCLEROSIS / 

This part of the program takes deaths from several categories and aggregates them. For example, "2049" through "2059" are grouped together into another code: "1009." The text inside of the slashes are notes that are not part of the SAS program. 

A couple of preparations, then we're off to write some simple lines of SQL. We need two additional fields in the Missouri death data. One will include the new codes such as "1009." Let's call it "AGGCOD." (Stands for aggre- gated cause of death.) The other will include English translations of those codes, also courtesy of the SAS pro- gram borrowed from Kansas. We'll call that field "TRANCOD." The field that already includes the range of codes we're going to aggregate is called "ALLCOD." 

Now, with a lowly word processor or Excel, you can write commands to FoxPro. 

Example: Copy and paste a sec- tion into a Word document, then on the tool bar, activate the button that looks like a paragraph mark. It al- 

12


January February 2003


Uplink 

lows you to view hidden characters. In this SAS file, we noted that the line before "OTHER INFECTIONS- PARASITES" has an extra para- graph return. We deleted it. Also, some, but not all, of the category notes were preceded by two tabs before the first slash mark. We in- serted those to make all of them the same. 

Then, we copied that into an Excel spreadsheet, then used Data > Text to Columns to make a new col- umn, using the equal sign as the delimiter. Now, we have the new codes in a separate column. We made the appropriate number of columns between the old codes and the new ones - by simply counting the commas - and used Text to Columns again to delimit the columns with commas. Now, we have single codes or a range of codes in separate columns. 

Rather than go through old ground we'll touch on just a couple of items regarding a function called BE- TWEEN. (MaryJo Sylwester, of USA Today, wrote an article for the September/October 2002 Uplink showing how to use Excel to write FoxPro program language.) Notice in several categories there are ranges of codes. For example, the "OTHER INFECTIONS" codes in- clude "2001"-"2003." We'll do a simple find-and-replace in Excel to change those hyphens to com- mas, then we're ready to write a program line to throw in a BE- TWEEN function. 

In our example, the codes "2001","2003" are in cell A2. The codes we eventually want to populate the just-created data field called AGGCOD are in cell C2. So in the cell B2, we'll type in this language: 

=IF(MID(A2,7,1)=",","REPLACE all AGGCOD with "&TRIM(C2)&" for BETWEEN(ALLCOD,"&A2&")"," 

In other words, if there's a comma separating the two items - that is, if 

M
Eto Edit View Insert Format Tools Data Window Help
 as
x
AY
X
DG
Times New Roman
12
B
I
U
 B6
update deaths set TRANCOO WHERE AGGCOD = &&AS
 A
8
C
D
 6
1001
update deaths set TRANCOD =TUBERCULOSIS" WHERE AGGCOD = '1001'
BERCULOSIS


language will eventually wind up in the field called TRANCOD. Again using Excel, with the equal sign as the delimiter, the spreadsheet soft- ware becomes a tool of writing SQL commands. No BETWEEN function 

there's a range in the particular cell and not a single value - then plug in the language needed. If not, then leave the cell blank. 

The result: REPLACE all AGGCOD with "1005" for BETWEEN(ALLCOD,"2001","2003" 

That line tells FoxPro to go to the new field AGGCOD and plug in the code "1005" every time the field ALLCOD values fall between "2001" and "2003." We just repeated these steps a few more times, resulting in a long list of SQL commands. 

Then we were ready to move on to the next step, again from a short example of the Kansas SAS file: 

proc format library = death print; VALUE STIR31DS 

1001r='TUBERCULOSIS' 1002r="SEPTICEMIA' 1003r='SYPHILIS/ "10047="AIDS/HIV" '1005' ='OTHER INFECTIONS-PARASITES' 1006'='CANCER' 21007P=:DIABETES' 11008"=VALZHEIMERS DISEASE' '1009'="HEART DISEASE' 1010'='HYPERTENSION' "1011'='STROKE' 012'=TATHEROSCLEROSIS 

The first codes, of course, are in the AGGCOD field. The rest of the 

is needed this time; it's a straight translation for one code to a text label. Assuming that the codes are in A column and the terms are in C column, in B column, the Excel lan- guage would be: 

="REPLACE all TRANCOD with "&TRIM(C2)& for AGGCOD = "&A2 

The resulting SQL line: REPLACE all TRANCOD with `TUBER- CULOSIS' for AGGCOD = 1001 

If one wanted to do the same work in Access SQL language, it would be slightly different. The Excel formula looks like: 

="UPDATE deaths SET TRANCOD ="&TRIM(C6 WHERE AGGCOD = "&A6 

The results: 

UPDATE deaths SET TRANCOD = TU- BERCULOSIS WHERE AGGCOD = '1001 

To download the FoxPro program created from the SAS file, go to www.nicar.org/techtips.html. There are even more techniques for using SAS materials without the SAS price tag. We'll share them in a future edi- tion of Uplink. 

Contact Jeff Porter by e-mail at jeff@nicar.org 

January . February 2003


13


MR Databass Library 573.884.7711 

OPEN SOURCE 

Office package needs more work 

By Aron Pilhofer, Center for Public Integrity 

Last spring, Sun Microsystems re- leased a new version of its StarOffice suite for PC, promising it would deliver the same functions as Microsoft Office at about one-tenth the price. 

About the same time, an open-source version of the StarOffice suite OpenOffice.org - emerged from beta testing, with nearly the same features, but at no cost. 

spreadsheet and database work), stick with MS Office for now. 

A bit of history 

A few years ago, Sun Microsystems bought StarOffice, then a commercial product, and later decided to release it under open-source rules. Under these rules, anyone may download, view or alter the programming source code be- hind the application, while the copyright owner maintains its rights. 

Untitled1 OpenOffice.org 643
 File Edit View Insert Format Tools Data Window Help

Arial
10

A1

A

I
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 9

10
 11
 12
 13
 14
 15
 16
 17
 18
 19
 20
 21
 22
 23
 24
 25


After putting both to the test, I can say that they are very impressive and de- liver many of the same features as MS Office. But there are enough small shortcomings - and one critical limit to the spreadsheet - that I'm not quite ready to recommend giving up on MS Office just yet. 

For serious computer-assisted report- ing (minimal word processing, heavy 

The StarOffice code was placed in the hands of an organization of largely volunteer programmers and was re- named OpenOffice.org. Meanwhile, Sun continued to develop StarOffice internally and released it in May. 

The OpenOffice project and the Sun developers worked very closely, so it's no surprise that StarOffice and OpenOffice are almost identical. Unlike 

OpenOffice, StarOffice includes printed documentation and technical support. 

Installation 

I have installed OpenOffice and StarOffice on Windows ME, Windows XP Home and Professional editions, and Mandrake, Gentoo and Red Hat Linux. All went smooth as silk. 

But there's one huge warning for Win- dows/MS Office users: During instal- lation you must change a default set- ting that makes Open/StarOffice the default program for MS Office files. Otherwise, Windows will specify Open/ StarOffice as the startup program for these files. 

Windows users may also have to download and install the free Java Runtime Environment from Sun Microsystems (www.sun.com). 

What's inside? 

Both products include a word proces- sor, spreadsheet, presentation pro- gram, a database front-end and a drawing program. Of these, I have used the first three extensively, the database front-end somewhat and the drawing program not at all. StarOffice includes a database man- ager, a stripped-down version of Adabas. But it is limited to databases of 300 MB and allows no more than three concurrent users. These make the program largely useless for CAR. Otherwise the two office suites are nearly identical. 

Word processor The people at Sun probably realized that a good word processing applica- tion is a must for an office suite. So they obviously spent most of the de- velopment on this part of the Star/Open office suite, and it shows. 

This is the one application that ri- vals its MS Office equivalent. I ed- ited large and small files in OpenOffice, including a 100-page book filled with odd formatting, em- bedding comments and change tracking codes - and OpenOffice handled that flawlessly. 

14


January February 2003


Uplink 

Everything imported from MS Word perfectly, with some tiny exceptions. Images were slightly larger that before, and sometimes just a hair off their cor- rect position. MS Word users will find it easy to switch to the OpenOffice word processor because almost every fea- ture in Word can be found in OpenOffice. There are some nice extras in the OpenOffice package that makes work- ing in that environment easier. 

Spreadsheet 

This application, called Calc, is slightly less polished, and has one huge short- coming: It only accepts 32,000 rows of data, compared to 65,500 or so in Ex- cel. This is bad for journalists doing CAR, but not necessarily fatal. If you import a spreadsheet that is too long, it will simply lop off all rows past num- ber 32,000 and tell you so. 

Beyond that, there is a lot good about Calc. Excel users will feel right at home. You'll find similar features used in CAR: string functions, pivot tables (called "datapilots") and charts. 

It also has some nice extras. For ex- ample, you can do a three-level filter in Calc, compared to two levels in Ex- cel. You also can insert graphics, form elements and other automation tools right into the sheet. 

Connecting the spreadsheet to an ex- listing data source (such as an exter- nal Excel spreadsheet or .dbf table) is also very easy. Like the word proces- sor, Calc imports data seamlessly from any version of MS Office, right through version XP, 

One annoyance: Unlike Excel, Calc does not allow you to select non-ad- joining cells using the control key. 

Database manager 

Good news and bad news here. The good news: Connecting OpenOffice to an external data source is an easy, wiz- ard-driven process. Once you connect you can manipulate the data through a number of means. You can use the da- tabase to create a merge file with your word processor. You can manipulate the 

numbers in Calc. Or you can send SQL commands directly to the data source. 

OpenOffice also offers a nice front-end that looks and works very much like the Access query by example grid, though this feature is buried. You can link tables and send queries, just like you do in Access. 

Now the bad news: You can't connect to an Access database directly. You can connect via ODBC, but that is slower and somewhat limits what you can do. 

In addition, it seems you are restricted to select queries via the OpenOffice grid, which limits how much crunching you can do without writing SQL. And if you're going to write SQL, you might as well use a database application with some power, such as MySQL or Postgres. 

Recommendation: 

This is the one part of the OpenOffice suite that has changed very little since Sun's purchase of StarOffice. Unfor- tunately, it is the one program in the suite that journalists doing CAR would care about most. 

Those who aren't able to afford any of- fice suite software would do well to down- load OpenOffice at www.openoffice.org. It does just about everything as well as MS Office - with a few exceptions. 

For users stuck with an older version of MS Office (Office 95 or earlier), the OpenOffice programs would provide significant improvements, except for the database manager. 

Even older versions of Access are su- perior to the database manager in StarOffice. But, for CAR power users, there are plenty of other excellent open source database applications that run on Windows, Mac or Linux. MySQL rivals Oracle in terms of power and speed. The typical journal- ists doing CAR will find that the sim- plicity of Access cannot be beat, and users of Office 97, 2000 and XP should probably stick with what they have, at least for now. 

Contact Aron Pilhofer by e-mail at apilhofer@publicintegrity.org. 

Query: Query2
 File
Edit
View
Insert
Tools
Window
Help

94

hitters

look_players

*

PriKey

Y keyfield

KeyField

taken

Taken

player

bs

name

PLAYER

fname

Lname

Field

Alias

Table

Sort

Visible

Function

Criterion

or

Or

Or

or


January February 2003


15


www.nicar.org 

Implants continued from page 1 

So when editors asked them to propose a project with a national scope, they decided that it would be worth digging beyond these scattered stories to take an in-depth look at problems with medi- cal devices and the government's regu- latory role. 

Assembling information and looking for sources, they began talking with inves- tigative editor Tom Curran about pos- sible data analysis and brought me onto the project. 

Data entry time 

Our first goal was to acquire a data- base of FDA product recalls, and we were quick to learn that the agency had no such database. 

The FDA rarely orders recalls. Instead, manufacturers voluntarily recall their products and the FDA publishes a list of voluntary recalls on its Web site. 

If you want to find out if a product has been recalled, you can search. But if you want to find out how many heart valves have been recalled, which manufacturers have the most recalls, what reasons are most often given for recalls, you're out of luck. 

That is, unless you create your own database, which we did. Orr spent weeks going through the recall notices, pulling out recalls of implants, and cap- turing vital information about each product and problem. 

So this was a database built painstak- ingly by hand. But it was worth it. We found that the FDA had published re- call notices for 573 implant devices since 1992 - far more than the handful that received national attention. 

We also found the number of recalls to be on the rise. From 1992 through 1998, an average of 40 implanted medical de- vices were withdrawn per year. That number jumped to 96 in 1999, 79 in 2000, and 117 in 2001. 

MAUDE matching 

Next we wanted to match our recall data to the FDA's Manufacturer and User Facility Device Experience Da- tabase. MAUDE, for short, is a key component of the FDA's "aftermarket surveillance" program. 

The IRE & NICAR Database Library makes the MAUDE database available to news organizations. News organi- zations may purchase the data for the entire United States on CD. For more information see www.ire.org/datalibrary/ databases/maude/. Also see "Digging into health, medicine" on page 1 of this issue of Uplink for more information about how MAUDE has been used in news reporting. 

Doctors, distributors and manufactur- ers who become aware of cases in which a device may have malfunc- tioned or otherwise injured a patient are supposed to fill out an incident re- port and, ultimately, manufacturers are required to forward any incident reports they receive to the FDA. 

We learned from the outset that MAUDE is incomplete. Not every doctor fills out an incident report each time there is a problem with a medi- cal device. 

Also, as we discovered in our report- ing, manufacturers don't always report what they know. The FDA doesn't have the staff to conduct as many inspec- tions as they'd like, but when they do get around to auditing the companies they regulate, they sometimes find stacks of incident reports that had never made it into MAUDE. 

We knew that going into it. What we didn't realize is just how much of a bear MAUDE can be to work with. We bought the data on CD from NICAR, and if there were two words to describe MAUDE from a technical perspective, they would be big and messy. 

How big is big? If you buy the disks, be prepared to process about 1.5 GB of raw data, which will swell up to more 

than 2 GB once you create field in- dexes. The database is composed of interlocking tables, including one that contains a narrative of the incident. It took Microsoft SQL Server all night to index that one. 

Messy data 

Once you get past that, then you have to deal with the mess. No, the data is not badly formatted. It's just poorly re- ported. You'll find manufacturers iden- tified 50 different ways in the database. You'll find the same product identified 20 different ways. 

We wanted to get an idea of how many deaths involving implantable devices were reported to the government, and what kinds of devices were most often cited in these death reports. Fortu- nately, each incident record contains a three-character product type code that can be joined to a lookup table containing more than 5,000 types of medical devices. 

Unfortunately, the coding system seems to have been devised at ran- dom. The letters in the code have no bearing on the type of product. Prod- ucts related to artificial hips don't all begin with H, and implantable products don't all begin with I. 

We got a little outside help here. A source at ECRI, a nonprofit medical device research organization, sent us a list of what they consider implantable medical devices. It was tied to their own coding system, but by eyeballing their list and eyeballing the FDA list, we were able to create a table of FDA product codes for implants. (Our ECRI source was gracious enough to review this list for us). 

After running the list of implants against the MAUDE tables, we were able to re- port that since 1991, manufacturers, doctors and hospitals filed more than 155,000 adverse event reports involv- ing 422 types of implants. Included in these were 2,333 cases in which a patient died. 

These are big numbers, and they're far 

16


January February 2003


Uplink 

from perfect. For one, MAUDE reports only include incidents where devices may have caused a problem - there's no requirement for each incident in the database to be investigated. 

Moreover, the entire question of cause of death is tricky. Many patients who receive certain kind of implants are dying to begin with and recognize the risk of their procedure - yet in the da- tabase, a death is a death is a death. 

But the numbers did accurately reflect what was reported to the government, and in the context of all of our report- ing, served to make the story more fac- tual and more interesting. 

Read "Foreign Objects" online at www.nj.com/special projects/implants/. 

Contact Robert Gebeloff by e-mail at rgebeloff@starledger.com. 

Charlotte continued from page 1 

journalists who gathered to share their knowledge - although with a bit more conflict. For example, some panel top- ics pitted one type of software against another (database mangers vs. spreadsheets!) instead of looking at how all these tools work together. (Ironically enough, we also had to move at the last minute in Raleigh from the hotel to the nearby convention cen- ter because of a hotel snafu.) 

The conference, composed of more than 50 panels and workshops, begins on Thursday afternoon with small roundtable sessions for those who have been practicing CAR for years. These workshops will look at more com- plex topics: intranet services for the newsroom, the latest in programming and data cleaning, the possible uses of social networking software, and new advances in GIS (mapping) software. 

Co-hosted by The Charlotte Observer and NBC News and with major spon- 

NICAR SERVICES 

Data Library tackles specialty data jobs 

By Jeff Porter, IRE and NICAR 

The IRE and NICAR Database Li- brary has looked at every block group in the United States and ev- ery speeding ticket in Cleveland. Those are just two of the process- ing or data analysis jobs the Data- base Library has completed during the past few months. 

Under contract with The Associated Press, NICAR downloaded Census 2000 Summary File 3 data files, transformed the raw text files into dBASE IV files and added some geographic elements to every table. NICAR's work for the AP began in March 2001, when the redistricting Census data became available and continued through the Summary File 1 and the SF3 releases. 

speeding ticket data from the state of Ohio and the city of Cleveland. For WEWS-Cleveland, we discovered the most likely places to get a ticket, found the officers who wrote the most, and discovered how much faster than the speed limit a driver can go before getting a ticket. 

Transcripts of the stories can be found at www.newsnet5.com/ theinvestigator1781686/detail.html and www.newsnet5.com/ theinvestigator/1784946/detail.html 

For a nominal cost, the Database Li- brary can conduct data analysis and transfer data from tape to CD for news organizations. For more infor- mation, call 573-884-7711. 

NICAR analyzed a year's worth of 

Contact Jeff Porter by e-mail at jeff@nicar.org. 

sorships by the Gannett Foundation and Knight-Ridder, the conference will offer continual hands-on training classes. The classes include sessions for both the beginner and advanced practitioner in effectively using the Internet, spreadsheets, database man- agers, statistics and mapping. 

The panels will, as always, cover spe- cific beats and showcase the best sto- ries of the past year. Unlike previous years, the planners have sketched out a recommended path for those new to CAR, sort of a mini-boot camp. 

Friday morning will open with an over- view of CAR stories and techniques when just starting out. Most examples will involve smaller datasets that are accessible on the Web, have been built by other reporters, or are slices of data that can be quickly obtained from the IRE and NICAR database library. 

The Friday panels for beginners will 

offer an overview of CAR, including sto- ries and techniques from the most fre- quently covered beats, and how to get good data from the Web. In the after- noon beginners can go to hands-on classes to learn how to do simple analysis with spreadsheets. Some of the data will be from the Census. 

On Saturday morning, the beginners' track will discuss how to weave CAR into a beat, how to use CAR techniques to investigate municipal government and using Census data in everyday report- ing. The hands-on sessions that after- noon will focus on learning these skills. 

Sunday morning panelists will talk about getting a story off the ground, and offer story ideas and organizing and writing tips. The track will finish with a hands-on session to walk through import- ing data to analysis to writing a lead. 

Contact IRE Executive Director Brant Houston by e-mail at brant@ire.org. 

January
February 2003


17


Medicine continued from page 1 

Journalists were already on the story, using databases to examine faulty medical products and shortcomings in patient care. A variety of data sources can help with big-picture analysis and breaking public health news, whether it's suspicious hospital deaths or a product recall. 

When Michael Berens investigated the impact of errors by nurses for the Chi- cago Tribune (Story No. 17136 in the IRE Resource Center), he found that at least 1,720 patients had died and more than 9,500 had been hurt due to registered nurses "besieged by cuts in staff and other belt-tightening in U.S. hospitals" from 1995-2000. 

A major resource for the investigation was the Manufacturers User and De- vice Experience Database (MAUDE). This database from the U.S. Food and Drug Administration contains reports about injuries, deaths and accidents related to medical devices. It also con- tains information about the malfunc- tioning devices. 

The Star-Ledger recently used MAUDE in its investigation of faulty medical devices. (See "Databases show implant troubles" on page 1). 

One of the most useful features for jour- nalists is a memo field detailing the inci- dents. It also contains references that can be used to request detailed records for each report. 

It takes patience to cull through MAUDE, because incident reporting is voluntary and thus prone to gaps. Data entries also are inconsistent. Journal- ists using MAUDE can examine spe- cific products or manufacturers, as the Tallahassee Democrat did for its report about automated drug pumps linked to accidental overdoses (Story No. 17311). 

MAUDE is available from the IRE and NICAR Database Library. For more de- tailed information about the data see 

www.ire.org/datalibrary/databases/ maude/. 

Berens also used a database of in- vestigative records from HCFA (now known as the Center for Medicaid and Medicare Services, or CMS) and a database of disciplinary records col- lected by the National Council of State Boards of Nursing (www.ncsbn.org), obtained from the state licensing agency and scanned into electronic form. 

Access to health-system data varies by state. For example, Wilmington (N.C.) Morning Star reporter Cory Weiss knew that local hospitals would not share their internal inves- tigation into rising staphylococcal in- fection rates. Instead, the state's death certificate database provided a window on staph-related deaths (Story No. 16583). 

Do some research to find out what your state regulates, what kinds of reports the statutes specify, and whether any records exist as data- bases. Or, if the state yields little, find local records collected nationally by the CMS. 

When planning a project, keep in mind that the medical profession has its own rigorous scientific standards for evaluating performance, and the media's methods need to be strin- gent. Many news organizations con- sult with independent experts. One major concern is making an accurate comparison among patient outcomes because of all the variables that af- fect risk in a diverse population with many different procedures and diag- noses. The Fort Worth Star-Telegram, for example, worked with a research scientist to analyze patient records (see article on page 8). 

Here are some available data sources: 

Birth and death records. 
Inspection reports, mandated by state law or under the Medicare program. 

Health maintenance organization finan- cial data plus information on participat- ing facilities and patient complaints. 
Uniform billing records. These data- bases describe each patient's illness, any surgeries, age, insurance type, town or ZIP code and are available from state agencies. Everything will be anonymous, but you can ask for a unique patient iden- tifier as a substitute for names. 
Medicare billing data can be obtained from CMS. Check with your local branch office for details on these requests; pri- vate companies often maintain and pro- vide the records. 
For more information on data sources, see tipsheet Nos. 1710, 407 and 643 in the IRE Resource Center. 
The FDA Adverse Event Reporting System contains incidents related to pharmaceuticals and biological prod- ucts like blood (available from NICAR; for details, go to www.ire.org/ datalibrary/databases/AERS/). 

Other resources can help: 

National Association of Health Data Organizations (www.nahdo.org) 
ECRI (www.ecri.org) is a nonprofit spe- cializing in medical device safety issues. 
The Centers for Disease Control tracks public health data (www.cdc.gov). See its National Center for Health Sta- tistics Data Warehouse (www.cdc.gov/ nchs/datawh.htm) 
The National Association of Health Data Organizations, 703-532-3282. 

See the January-February 2003 IRE Journal for even more about investi- gating problems with hospitals. Berens of the Chicago Tribune details how he used patient billing records to help un- cover infections in hospitals. The news- paper reported that three-quarters of the infections could have been pre- vented. Berens also shares tips for in- vestigating your local hospital. 

Contact Megan Christensen by e-mail at megan@nicar.org. 

18


January February 2003


Uplink


IRE and NICAR Services 

Investigative Reporters and Editors, Inc. is a grassroots nonprofit organi- zation dedicated to improving the qual- ity of investigative reporting within the field of journalism. IRE was formed in 1975 with the intent of creating a net- working tool and a forum in which jour- nalists from across the country could raise questions and exchange ideas. IRE provides educational services to reporters, editors and others interested in investigative reporting and works to maintain high professional standards. 

Programs and Services 

IRE Resource Center: A rich reserve of print and broadcast stories, tipsheets and guides to help you start and complete the best work of your career. This unique library is the start- ing point of any piece you're working on. You can search through abstracts of more than 19,000 investigative re- porting stories through our Web site. Contact: Carolyn Edds, carolyn@ire.org, 573-882-3364 

Database Library: Administered by IRE and the National Institute for Com- puter-Assisted Reporting. The library has copies of many government data- bases, and makes them available to news organizations at or below actual cost. Analysis services are available on these databases, as is help in deci- phering records you obtain yourself. Contact: Jeff Porter, jeff@ire.org, 573-882-1982 

Campaign Finance Information Center. Administered by IRE and the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Re- porting. It's dedicated to helping jour- nalists uncover the campaign money trail. State campaign finance data is collected from across the nation, cleaned and made available to jour- nalists. A search engine allows report- ers to track political cash flow across sev- eral states in federal and state races. Contact: Brant Houston, brant@ire.org, 573-882-2042 

On-the-Road Training: As a top pro- moter of journalism education, IRE of- fers loads of training opportunities throughout the year. Possibilities range from national conferences and regional 

workshops to weeklong boot camps and on-site newsroom training. Costs are on a sliding scale and fellowships are available to many of the events. Contact: Ron Nixon, ron@nicar.org, 573-882-2042 

Publications 

The IRE Journal: Published six times a year. Contains journalist profiles, how- to stories, reviews, investigative ideas and backgrounding tips. The Journal also provides members with the latest news on upcoming events and training opportunities from IRE and NICAR. Contact: Len Bruzzese, len@ire.org, 573-882-2042 

Uplink: Bimonthly newsletter by IRE and NICAR on computer-assisted re- porting. Often, Uplink stories are writ- ten after reporters have had particular success using data to investigate sto- ries. The columns include valuable in- formation on advanced database tech- niques as well as success stories writ- ten by newly trained CAR reporters. Contact: David Herzog, dherzog@nicar.org, 573-882-2127 

Reporter.org: A collection of Web- based resources for journalists, jour- nalism educators and others. Dis- counted Web hosting and services such as mailing list management and site development are provided to other nonprofit journalism organizations. Contact: Ted Peterson, ted@nicar.org, 573-884-7321 

For information on: Advertising: Pia Christensen, pia@ire.org. 573-884-2175 

Membership and subscriptions: John Green, jgreen@ire.org, 573-882-2772 

Conferences and Boot Camps: Ev Ruch-Graham, ev@ire.org, 573-882-8969 

Listservs: Ted Peterson, ted@nicar.org, 573-884-7321 

Mailing Address: IRE, 138 Neff Annex, Missouri School of Journalism, Columbia, MO 65211 

Computer-Assisted Reporting Boot Camps 

These unique seminars give journalists a jumpstart in computer-assisted reporting techniques. Participants are trained in how to acquire electronic information, use spreadsheets and databases to analyze the information and to translate that information into high-impact stories. The National Institute of Computer- Assisted Reporting provides follow-up help when participants return to their news organizations. 

March 23-28 - Columbia, Mo. May 18-23 - Columbia, Mo. Aug. 3-8 - Columbia, Mo. 

What participants have said about IRE and NICAR Computer-Assisted Reporting Boot Camps: 

"The workshop and the conference have convinced me that the investigative reporting approach and techniques can be easily applied to beat reporting and daily journalism." Afi-Odelia Scruggs, Professor of Journalism at Ohio Wesleyan University 

"Overall this is a wonderful seminar. This is a great start for working with CAR for someone who came with no experience." - Anonymous (from seminar evaluation) "Well worth the money!" - Anonymous (from seminar evaluation) 

More information is available at www.ire.org/training 

January
February 2003


19


Uplink


Uplink Info 

A newsletter of the National Institute for Computer-Assisted Reporting 

brant@ire.org Brant Houston Editor 

dherzog@nicar.org David Herzog Managing Editor 

jeff@nicar.org Jeff Porter Asst. Managing Editor 

Lisa Triefenbach Art Director 

Pia Christensen Copy Editor 

Stephanie Kang Holly Hacker Jaimi Dowdell Megan Christensen Contributing Editors 

School of Journalism. Editors Inc. and the Missouri of Investigative Reporters and NICAR is a joint program 

data analysis. training programs, tipsheets and government databases, supplying journalists with NICAR services include 

573-884-7711 Editorial 

573-882-2772 Subscriptions 

len@ire.org Len Bruzzese Director of Publications 

pia@ire.org Pia Christensen Advertising Coordinator 

jgreen@ire.org John Green Subscription Administrator 

IRE members $40, nonmembers $60 Subscriptions 

Columbia, MO 65211 Missouri School of Journalism IRE-NICAR, 138 Neff Annex Uplink Address: 

address changes to IRE-NICAR. Postmaster: Please send 



BJI JO dillyd 9078 LLLL HO aw 3937700 

S'N alvd OW 'A!O 68 ON 

"oul company pue

HON 8E1
 10 unossin

OW
